# Fuente
- archivo: European_ethical_Charter_on_the_use_of_Artificial_Intelligence_in_judicial_systems_and_their_environment.pdf
- ruta: C:\Users\matia\desarrollo\judiciales2026ush\ingesta\trabajos\internacional\European_ethical_Charter_on_the_use_of_Artificial_Intelligence_in_judicial_systems_and_their_environment.pdf
- extraido: 2026-04-24T11:34:19

# Contenido

EUROPEAN COMMISSION FOR THE  
EFFICIENCY OF JUSTICE (CEPEJ)

European ethical Charter  
on the use of Artificial Intelligence in 
judicial systems and their environment

Adopted at the 31st plenary meeting  
of the CEPEJ (Strasbourg, 3-4 December 2018)

EUROPEAN COMMISSION FOR THE 
EFFICIENCY OF JUSTICE (CEPEJ)
European Ethical Charter 
on the Use of Artificial Intelligence in 
Judicial Systems and their environment

Adopted at the 31st plenary meeting  
of the CEPEJ (Strasbourg, 3-4 December 2018)

Council of Europe

French edition:
Commission européenne pour l’efficacité 
de la justice (CEPEJ) – Charte éthique 
européenne d’utilisation de l’intelligence 
artificielle dans les systèmes 
judiciaires et leur environnement

The opinions expressed in this work are 
the responsibility of the authors and do 
not necessarily reflect the official policy 
of the Council of Europe. 

All requests concerning the 
reproduction or translation of all 
or part of this document should 
be addressed to the Directorate of 
Communication (F-67075 Strasbourg 
Cedex or publishing@coe.int). All 
other correspondence concerning 
this document should be addressed 
to European Commission for the 
Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ) 
cepej@coe.int

Cover and layout:  
Documents and Publications 
Production Department (SPDP), 
 Council of Europe 
Photo: Shutterstock

This publication has not been  
copy-edited by the SPDP Editorial 
Unit to correct typographical and 
grammatical errors.

© Council of Europe, February 2019 
Printed at the Council of Europe 

Contents

INTRODUCTION
THE FIVE PRINCIPLES OF THE ETHICAL CHARTER ON THE USE 
OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN JUDICIAL SYSTEMS AND THEIR 
ENVIRONMENT

5

7

8

3.

2.

1.

Principle of respect for fundamental rights: ensure that the design and 
implementation of artificial intelligence tools and services are compatible 
with fundamental rights
Principle of non-discrimination: Specifically prevent the development or 
intensification of any discrimination between individuals or groups of 
individuals
Principle of quality and security: With regard to the processing of judicial 
decisions and data, use certified sources and intangible data with models 
conceived in a multi-disciplinary manner, in a secure technological 
environment
Principle of transparency, impartiality and fairness: Make data processing 
methods accessible and understandable, authorise external audits
Principle “under user control”: Preclude a prescriptive approach and ensure 
that users are informed actors and in control of their choices
APPENDIX I – IN-DEPTH STUDY ON THE USE OF AI IN JUDICIAL SYSTEMS, 
NOTABLY AI APPLICATIONS PROCESSING JUDICIAL DECISIONS AND DATA 13

4.

5.

1.

2.

3.

4. 
5.
6.
7.

State of the use of artificial intelligence algorithms in the judicial systems 
of Council of Europe member States
Overview of open data policies relating to judicial decisions in the judicial 
systems of Council of Europe member States
Operating characteristics of artificial intelligence (machine learning) 
applied to judicial decisions
 Can artificial intelligence model legal reasoning in advance?
Can AIs explain judges’ behaviour in retrospect?
How is AI to be applied in civil, commercial and administrative justice?
Issues specific to criminal justice: prevention of offences, risk of recidivism 
and assessment of the level of danger
Specific questions relating to the protection of personal data
The potential and limitations of predictive justice tools

8.
9.
10.  The need for an in-depth public debate on these tools prior to the 

implementation of public policies for their development. The urgent need 
for cyberethics to provide a framework for the development of artificial 
intelligence algorithms while respecting fundamental rights

16

18

29
35
39
41

48
56
57

59

► Page 3

APPENDIX II – WHICH USES OF AI IN EUROPEAN JUDICIAL SYSTEMS?

Uses to be encouraged
Possible uses, requiring considerable methodological precautions
Uses to be considered following additional scientific studies
Uses to be considered with the most extreme reservations

APPENDIX III – GLOSSARY
APPENDIX IV – CHECKLIST FOR INTEGRATING THE CHARTER’S 
PRINCIPLES INTO YOUR PROCESSING METHOD
CHECKLIST FOR EVALUATING YOUR PROCESSING METHODS

63
64
64
66
66
69

76
77

Page 4 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

Introduction

A cknowledging the increasing importance of artificial intelligence1 (AI) 

in our modern societies, and the expected benefits when it will be fully 
used at the service of the efficiency and quality of justice, the CEPEJ for-
mally adopts the 5 fundamental principles entitled “European Ethical Charter 
on the use of AI in the judicial systems and their environment”. 

The  Charter  is  intended  for  public  and  private  stakeholders  responsible  for  the 
design and deployment of artificial intelligence tools and services that involve the 
design and deployment of artificial intelligence tools and services that involve the 
processing of judicial decisions and data (machine learning or any other methods 
processing of judicial decisions and data (machine learning or any other methods 
deriving from data science).
deriving from data science).

It also concerns public decision-makers in charge of the legislative or regulatory 
It also concerns public decision-makers in charge of the legislative or regulatory 
framework, of the development, audit or use of such tools and services. 
framework, of the development, audit or use of such tools and services. 

The use of such tools and services in judicial systems seeks to improve the effi-
The use of such tools and services in judicial systems seeks to improve the effi-
ciency and quality of justice, and should be encouraged. It must, however, be car-
ciency and quality of justice, and should be encouraged. It must, however, be car-
ried out with responsibly, with due regard for the fundamental rights of individu-
ried out with responsibly, with due regard for the fundamental rights of individu-
als as set forth in the European Convention on Human Rights and the Convention 
als as set forth in the European Convention on Human Rights and the Convention 
on  the  Protection  of  Personal  Data,  and  in  compliance  with  other  fundamental 
on  the  Protection  of  Personal  Data,  and  in  compliance  with  other  fundamental 
principles set out below, which should guide the framing of public justice policies 
principles set out below, which should guide the framing of public justice policies 
in this field.
in this field.

Judicial decision processing by artificial intelligence, according to their develop-
Judicial decision processing by artificial intelligence, according to their develop-
ers, is likely, in civil, commercial and administrative matters, to help improve the 
ers, is likely, in civil, commercial and administrative matters, to help improve the 
predictability of the application of the law and consistency of court decisions, sub-
predictability of the application of the law and consistency of court decisions, sub-
ject to compliance with the principles set out below. In criminal matters, their use 
ject to compliance with the principles set out below. In criminal matters, their use 
must be considered with the greatest reservations in order to prevent discrimina-
must be considered with the greatest reservations in order to prevent discrimina-
tion based on sensitive data, in conformity with the guarantees of a fair trial. 
tion based on sensitive data, in conformity with the guarantees of a fair trial. 

Whether designed with the aim of assisting in the provision of legal advice, help-
Whether designed with the aim of assisting in the provision of legal advice, help-
ing in drafting or in the decision-making process, or advising the user, it is essen-
ing in drafting or in the decision-making process, or advising the user, it is essen-
tial that processing is carried out with transparency, impartiality and equity, certi-
tial that processing is carried out with transparency, impartiality and equity, certi-
fied by an external and independent expert assessment. 
fied by an external and independent expert assessment. 

1. For the definition of artificial intelligence, see the Glossary appended.

► Page 5

Application of the Charter

The principles of the Charter should be subject to regular application, moni-
toring and evaluation by public and private actors, with a view to continuous 
improvement of practices. 

In  this  respect,  it  is  desirable  that  a  regular  review  of  the  implementation 
of the principles of the Charter be made by these actors, explaining, where 
appropriate, the reasons for non-implementation or partial implementation, 
accompanied by an action plan to introduce the necessary measures. 

The independent authorities mentioned in the Charter could be responsible 
to periodically assess the level of endorsement of the Charter’s principles by 
all actors, and to propose improvements to adapt it to changing technolo-
gies and uses of such technologies.

Page 6 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

The five principles of the 
Ethical Charter on the Use 
of Artificial Intelligence 
in Judicial Systems and 
their environment

design  and  implementation  of  artificial  intelligence  tools 
and services are compatible with fundamental rights.

specifically  prevent 
the  development  or  intensification  of  any  discrimination 
between individuals or groups of individuals. 

1 Principle of respect for fundamental rights: ensure that the 
2 Principle  of  non-discrimination: 
3 Principle of quality and security: with regard to the process-
4 Principle of transparency, impartiality and fairness: make 
5 Principle  “under  user  control”:  preclude  a  prescriptive 

ing of judicial decisions and data, use certified sources and 
intangible  data  with  models  elaborated  in  a  multi-discipli-
nary manner, in a secure technological environment.

data  processing  methods  accessible  and  understandable, 
authorise external audits. 

approach and ensure that users are informed actors and in 
control of the choices made.

► Page 7

1 Principle of respect for fundamental rights: ensure that the 

design  and  implementation  of  artificial  intelligence  tools 
and services are compatible with fundamental rights

■ The processing of judicial decisions and data must serve clear purposes, 
in full compliance with the fundamental rights guaranteed by the European 
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and the Convention on the Protection 
of Personal Data (Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to 
Automatic Processing of Personal Data, ETS No. 108 as amended by the CETS 
amending protocol No. 223). 

■ When artificial intelligence tools are used to resolve a dispute or as a 
tool to assist in judicial decision-making or to give guidance to the public, it 
is essential to ensure that they do not undermine the guarantees of the right 
of access to the judge and the right to a fair trial (equality of arms and respect 
for the adversarial process). 

■ They should also be used with due respect for the principles of the rule 
of law and judges’ independence in their decision-making process.

■ Preference should therefore be given to ethical-by-design2 or human-
rights-by-design approaches. This means that right from the design and learning 
phases, rules prohibiting direct or indirect violations of the fundamental values 
protected by the conventions are fully integrated. 

2. The ethical choice is made upstream by the program designers and is therefore not left 

to the user.

Page 8 ►

2 Principle  of  non-discrimination:  specifically  prevent 

the  development  or  intensification  of  any  discrimination 
between individuals or groups of individuals

■ Given the ability of these processing methods to reveal existing discrim-
ination, through grouping or classifying data relating to individuals or groups 
of individuals, public and private stakeholders must ensure that the methods 
do not reproduce or aggravate such discrimination and that they do not lead 
to deterministic analyses or uses.

■ Particular care must be taken in both the development and deployment 
phases, especially when the processing is directly or indirectly based on “sen-
sitive” data. This could include alleged racial or ethnic origin, socio-economic 
background, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, trade union 
membership, genetic data, biometric data, health-related data or data con-
cerning sexual life or sexual orientation. When such discrimination has been 
identified, consideration must be given to corrective measures to limit or, if 
possible, neutralise these risks and as well as to awareness-raising among 
stakeholders.

■ However, the use of machine learning and multidisciplinary scientific 
analyses to combat such discrimination should be encouraged. 

► Page 9

3 Principle  of  quality  and  security :  with  regard  to  the  pro-

cessing of judicial decisions and data, use certified sources 
and intangible data with models conceived in a multi-disci-
plinary manner, in a secure technological environment

■ Designers of machine learning models should be able to draw widely on 
the expertise of the relevant justice system professionals (judges, prosecutors, 
lawyers, etc.) and researchers/lecturers in the fields of law and social sciences 
(for example, economists, sociologists and philosophers).

■ Forming mixed project teams in short design cycles to produce functional 
models is one of the organisational methods making it possible to capitalise 
on this multidisciplinary approach.

■ Existing ethical safeguards should be constantly shared by these project 
teams and enhanced using feedback.

■ Data based on judicial decisions that is entered into a software which 
implements a machine learning algorithm should come from certified sources 
and should not be modified until they have actually been used by the learning 
mechanism. The whole process must therefore be traceable to ensure that 
no modification has occurred to alter the content or meaning of the decision 
being processed. 

■ The models and algorithms created must also be able to be stored 
and executed in secure environments, so as to ensure system integrity and 
intangibility.

Page 10 ►

4 Principle of transparency, impartiality and fairness: make 

data  processing  methods  accessible  and  understandable, 
authorise external audits

■ A balance must be struck3 between the intellectual property of certain 
processing methods and the need for transparency (access to the design 
process), impartiality (absence of bias)4, fairness and intellectual integrity 
(prioritising the interests of justice) when tools are used that may have legal 
consequences or may significantly affect people’s lives. It should be made clear 
that these measures apply to the whole design and operating chain as the 
selection process and the quality and organisation of data directly influence 
the learning phase.

■ The first option is complete technical transparency (for example, open 
source code and documentation), which is sometimes restricted by the 
protection of trade secrets. The system could also be explained in clear and 
familiar language (to describe how results are produced) by communicating, 
for example, the nature of the services offered, the tools that have been 
developed, performance and the risks of error. Independent authorities or 
experts could be tasked with certifying and auditing processing methods or 
providing advice beforehand. Public authorities could grant certification, to 
be regularly reviewed. 

3. Of interest in this connection is the suggestion made on page 38 of the Council of Europe’s 
MSI-NET study on “Algorithms and Human Rights”: “The provision of entire algorithms or 
the underlying software code to the public is an unlikely solution in this context, as private 
companies regard their algorithm as key proprietary software that is protected. However, 
there may be a possibility of demanding that key subsets of information about the algorithms 
be provided to the public, for example which variables are in use, which goals the algorithms 
are being optimised for, the training data and average values and standard deviations of 
the results produced, or the amount and type of data being processed by the algorithm.” Or 
even the suggestions appearing on page 117 of the “AI for humanity” report drafted by Mr 
Cédric Villani, a member of the French National Assembly as part of a mission assigned to 
him by the Prime Minister of the French Republic: “The auditors may be satisfied with simply 
checking the fairness and equity of a programme (doing only what is required of them), by 
submitting a variety of false input data, for example, or by creating a large quantity of system 
user profiles according to precise guidelines.” In addition, there are also the statements in the 
report by the House of Lords, “AI in the UK: ready, willing and able?”, paragraphs 92, 96-99.
In this connection, it is interesting to note the solutions generally considered for ensuring 
the neutrality of algorithms in the above-mentioned report by the House of Lords (para-
graphs 114, 115, 116, 119, 120): more diverse datasets, more diversity and multidisciplinary 
approaches, more auditing of aspects such as data processing and the manner in which 
the machine is constructed.

4.

► Page 11

5 Principle  “under  user  control”:  preclude  a  prescriptive 

approach and ensure that users are informed actors and in 
control of their choices

■ User autonomy must be increased and not restricted through the use of 
artificial intelligence tools and services.

■ Professionals in the justice system should, at any moment, be able to 
review judicial decisions and the data used to produce a result and continue 
not to be necessarily bound by it in the light of the specific features of that 
particular case.

■ The user must be informed in clear and understandable language whether 
or not the solutions offered by the artificial intelligence tools are binding, of 
the different options available, and that s/he has the right to legal advice and 
the right to access a court. S/he must also be clearly informed of any prior 
processing of a case by artificial intelligence before or during a judicial process 
and have the right to object, so that his/her case can be heard directly by a 
court within the meaning of Article 6 of the ECHR. 

■ Generally speaking, when any artificial intelligence-based information 
system is implemented there should be computer literacy programmes for 
users and debates involving professionals from the justice system. 

Page 12 ►

Appendix I
In-depth study on the use of 
AI in judicial systems, notably 
AI applications processing 
judicial decisions and data

prepared  by  Mr  Xavier  Ronsin,  First  President  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  of 
Rennes, scientific expert (France), 
and 
Mr Vasileios  Lampos,  principal  research  fellow  at  the  Computer  Science 
department of University College London (UCL), scientific expert (United 
Kingdom), 

and with the contribution of Ms Agnès Maîtrepierre, judge, member of the 
Consultative Committee of the Convention for the Protection of Individ-
uals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data of the Council 
of Europe (France)

The following experts also contributed to fintune the Study:

Mr  Francesco  Contini,  Senior  Researcher  at  the  Research  Institute  on  Judicial 
Systems – National Research Council (IRSIG-CNR), Bologna (Italy)

Mr  Francesco  De  Santis,  Professor  of  Human  Rights  Procedures,  University  of 
Naples (Italy)

Mr Jean Lassègue, philosopher and epistemologist, research fellow at the Cen-
tre National de Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and associate researcher at the 
Institut des Hautes Etudes sur la Justice (IHEJ) (France)

Ms  Dory  Reiling,  Honorary  Senior  Judge,  Independent  Expert  on  Information 
Technology and Judicial Reform (Netherlands)

Mr  Aleš  Završnik,  Chief  Researcher  at  the  Institute  of  Criminology,  Associate 
Professor  at  the  Faculty  of  Law,  University  of  Ljubljana  (Slovenia)  and  EURIAS 
Researcher 2017-18 at Collegium Helveticum in Zürich (Switzerland)

► Page 13

INTRODUCTION

1.
The wave of digital transformation in our societies still has an uneven 
effect  on  the  judicial  systems  of  Council  of  Europe  member  States.  Many 
European countries seem to have already developed an extremely advanced 
approach to using practical applications (in terms of both technology and 
legal  support),  while  for  others,  this  is  still  just  an  emerging  issue  and  the 
focus is solely on effective IT management.

2.
Among  the  technologies  at  work  in  this  great  digital  transformation, 
artificial intelligence (AI) appears to be both the most spectacular and the 
most striking. In the United States, “robot lawyers” are already at work and 
seem to converse in natural language with humans. Legal tech start-ups spe-
cialising in the design of new legal services offer new applications to legal 
professions,  mainly  lawyers,  legal  services  and  insurers,  allowing  in-depth 
access to judicial information and case law. These private companies even 
aim to predict judges’ decisions with “predictive justice” tools, although we 
will see that this may not be the best description for them5.

3.
An  initial  examination  of  this  phenomenon,  however,  prompts  us  to 
differentiate between this commercial discourse and the reality of the use 
and  deployment  of  these  technologies.  For  the  time  being  judges  in  the 
Council of Europe member States do not seem to be making any practical 
and daily use of predictive software. Local tests6 and academic work7 have 
been carried out to explore the potential of these applications, but they have 
not yet been applied on a wide scale. The initiative for the development of 
these tools comes largely from the private sector, whose clientele so far has 
been  made  up  mostly  of  insurance  companies,  lawyers  and  legal  services 
wanting to reduce legal uncertainty and the unpredictability of judicial deci-
sions. Nevertheless, public decision-makers are beginning to be increasingly 
solicited  by  a  private  sector  wishing  to  see  these  tools  –  which  are  some-
times “beta” versions, i.e. they will evolve over time – integrated into public 
policies.

5. See in particular the frame opening Chapter 9.
6. For example, the Douai and Rennes Courts of Appeal in France conducted a three-month 

trial in 2017 with a software programme labelled “predictive” by a panel of judges.

7. Work on a sample of 584 decisions of the European Court of Human Rights: Nikolaos 
Aletras, Dimitrios Tsarapatsanis, Daniel Preoţiuc-Pietro, Vasileios Lampos, “Predicting 
judicial decisions of the European Court of Human Rights: a Natural Language Processing 
perspective”, published on 24 October 2016, [Online], https://peerj.com/articles/cs-93/

Page 14 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

4.
In the line of the thought process initiated in its “Guidelines on how to 
drive change towards Cyberjustice”,8 the CEPEJ proposes to provide public 
decision-makers and justice professionals with keys for a better understand-
ing of the “predictive justice” phenomenon.

5.
The  first  task  will  be  to  clarify  the  questions  relating  to  the  intrinsic 
nature  of  these  mass  case-law  data  processing  systems,  along  with  their 
technical  and  theoretical  limitations.  These  aspects  have  not  often  been 
mentioned in the debate on this subject in the judicial sphere but they are 
very well known and discussed by specialists in these technologies (mathe-
maticians, statisticians and computer scientists) and deserve some attention.

Secondly,  this  document  will  analyse  the  benefits  and  risks  of  these 
6.
tools. While their supporters highlight their assets in terms of transparency, 
predictability and standardisation of case-law, their critics point to the lim-
itations and the reasoning bias of the software currently on the market. The 
inherent risks in these technologies may even transcend the act of judging 
and affect essential functioning elements of the rule of law and judicial sys-
tems, to which the Council of Europe is particularly attached.

7.
These include principles such as the primacy of law. The effect of these 
tools may be not only to provide incentives but to be almost prescriptive, 
creating  a  new  form  of  normativity,  which  could  supplement  the  law  by 
regulating the sovereign discretion of the judge, and potentially leading, in 
the long term, to a standardisation of judicial decisions based no longer on 
case-by-case  reasoning  by  the  courts,  but  on  a  pure  statistical  calculation 
linked to the average compensation previously awarded by other courts.

8.
There is also a need to consider whether these solutions are compatible 
with the individual rights enshrined in the European Convention on Human 
Rights (ECHR). These include the right to a fair trial (particularly the right to a 
natural judge established by law, the right to an independent and impartial 
tribunal and equality of arms in judicial proceedings) and, where insufficient 
care has been taken to protect data communicated in open data, the right to 
respect for private and family life.

9. While taking these issues into consideration, the document highlights 
the great potential of AI to help legal professionals in their work. There is no 
doubt that some AI applications which are still under development or test-
ing, such as those designed to improve legal research, could be very useful in 
rendering processing of the judicial workload faster and more efficient. The 

8. See in particular paragraph 51 of the document CEPEJ(2016)13, Guidelines on how to drive 

change towards Cyberjustice.

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 15

document highlights these positive examples and generally advocates the 
use of AI by legal professionals according to their needs, provided that due 
regard is shown for the individual rights guaranteed by the ECHR and Coun-
cil  of  Europe  standards,  particularly  in  criminal  matters.  Far  from  being  a 
simple instrument for improving the efficiency of judicial systems, AI should 
strengthen  the  guarantees  of  the  rule  of  law,  together  with  the  quality  of 
public justice.

10.
Lastly, the document suggests means of monitoring this phenome-
non in the form of an ethical charter, emphasising the need for a cautious 
approach to the integration of these tools into public policies. It is essential 
that any public debate involves all the stakeholders, whether legal profes-
sionals, legal tech companies or scientists, to enable them to convey the 
full scope and possible impact of the introduction of artificial intelligence 
applications in judicial systems and devise the ethical framework in which 
they  must  operate.  Subsequently,  this  debate  could  go  beyond  a  pure 
“business” framework, involving citizens themselves and hence contribut-
ing to some extent to general computer literacy, as has been achieved in 
Canada.9

1. State of the use of artificial intelligence algorithms in 
the judicial systems of Council of Europe member States

In 2018, the use of artificial intelligence algorithms in European judicial systems 
remains primarily a private-sector commercial initiative aimed at insurance com-
remains primarily a private-sector commercial initiative aimed at insurance com-
panies, legal departments, lawyers and individuals.
panies, legal departments, lawyers and individuals.

The  use  of  AI  in  the  judicial  field  appears  to  be  quite  popular  in  the 
11.
United  States,  which  has  invested  in  these  tools  in  a  fairly  uncomplicated 
way, both in civil and criminal matters.10

12. Pinpointing instances of AI algorithm initiatives in the judicial systems 
of Council of Europe member States is a more difficult task, as most of the 
initiatives  come  from  the  private  sector  and  are  not  often  integrated  into 
public policies.

The  question  of  the  use  of  AI  in  judicial  systems  was  dealt  with  in  a 
13.
specific  online  survey,  launched  in  April  2018  for  representatives  of  the 

9. Declaration of Montreal, available at https://www.declarationmontreal-iaresponsable.

com/demarche, accessed 16 July 2018.

10. See COMPAS algorithms or tools such as RAVEL LAW or ROSS chatbot

Page 16 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

CEPEJ member States and civil society. The response level was relatively low 
and did not allow clear trends to be identified. Some private operators did 
not seem very receptive to this survey and the members of the CEPEJ, who 
belong for the most part to ministries of justice or higher councils of justice, 
were able to quote only the tools currently used by the public sphere.

14. As a result, the inventory below is only partial and is based solely on 
research conducted by experts and the secretariat using publicly available 
literature.11

15. Classifications  can  be  made  according  to  the  service  offered.  The 
involvement of AI can vary greatly according to the applications. For illustra-
tive purposes, the main categories are as follows:

► Advanced case-law search engines 

► Online dispute resolution 

► Assistance in drafting deeds 

► Analysis (predictive, scales)

► Categorisation of contracts according to different criteria and detection 

of divergent or incompatible contractual clauses

► “Chatbots” to inform litigants or support them in their legal proceedings

16.
Latvia stated that it was exploring the possibilities of machine learning 
for the administration of justice. The main purpose would be to process court 
statistics to draw up provisional estimates of human and financial resources 
to be allocated.

17. Other  activities  carried  out  by  legal  tech  companies  have  not  been 
included in this classification because they involve little or no artificial intel-
ligence processing: some sites offer access to legal information, “cloud” solu-
tions, electronic signatures, etc.

18. A  non-exhaustive  list  of  legal  services  making  use  of  artificial  intelli-
gence in their operations is set out below:

11. See summary bibliography in Appendix IV – substantial contributions from Benoît Charpentier 
as well as Giuseppe Contissa and Giovanni Sartori (https://media.wix.com/ugd/c21db1_14b-
04c49ba7f46bf9a5d88581cbda172.pdf) and Emmanuel Barthe (http://www.precisement.org/
blog/Intelligence-artificielle-en-droit-derriere-la-hype-la-realite.html#nb14) (French only)

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 17

Software

State

Type

Doctrine.fr

Prédictice

France
France

France

Search engine
Search engine

Analysis (except criminal cases)

Case Law Analytics France

Analysis (except criminal cases)
Analysis (except criminal cases)

JurisData Analytics 
(LexisNexis)

France

Search engine, Analysis (except 
criminal cases)

Luminance

United Kingdom Analysis
United Kingdom Analysis

Watson/Ross (IBM) USA

Analysis

HART

United Kingdom Analysis (criminal, risk of 
United Kingdom Analysis (criminal, risk of 

Lex Machina 
(LexisNexis)

USA

reoffending)
reoffending)

Analysis

2. Overview of open data policies relating 
to judicial decisions in the judicial systems 
of Council of Europe member States

The availability of data is an essential condition for the development of AI, ena-
bling  it  to  perform  certain  tasks  previously  carried  out  by  humans  in  a  non-au-
bling  it  to  perform  certain  tasks  previously  carried  out  by  humans  in  a  non-au-
tomated  manner. The  more  data  available,  the  more  AI  is  able  to  refine  models 
tomated  manner. The  more  data  available,  the  more  AI  is  able  to  refine  models 
improving their predictive ability. An open data approach to judicial decisions is 
improving their predictive ability. An open data approach to judicial decisions is 
therefore a prerequisite for the work of legal tech companies specialising in search 
therefore a prerequisite for the work of legal tech companies specialising in search 
engines or trend analysis (“predictive justice”).
engines or trend analysis (“predictive justice”).

Processing  of  these  data  raises  a  number  of  issues,  such  as  changes  in  the  for-
Processing  of  these  data  raises  a  number  of  issues,  such  as  changes  in  the  for-
mation  of  case-law  and  protection  of  personal  data  (including  the  names  of 
mation  of  case-law  and  protection  of  personal  data  (including  the  names  of 
professionals).
professionals).

19. Computer-raised data are said to be the “oil” of the 21st century as their 
use and cross-referencing are producing a whole new wealth. Even though 
some stakeholders and authors dispute this argument, the global successes 
of  the  digital  industry  over  recent  decades  have  confirmed  the  enormous 
growth potential of this field of activity.

20.
The  quantification  of  human  activities,  now  on  a  global  scale,  could 
not fail to touch on the data produced by the public sector. This is what has 
prompted  the  movement  to  open  up  public  data,  based  on  much  older 
imperatives which are the founding principles of our constitutional states.

Page 18 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

21.
The major change in recent years has been brought about by the emer-
gence of downloadable public data (open data), notably in the context of 
the “Partnership for Open Government” (OGP). The OGP is a non-governmen-
tal organisation bringing together nearly 70 member States (including many 
of the Council of Europe member States) with representatives of civil society 
and digital giants. The aim of this openness is to improve the transparency of 
public activities, encourage citizens in the development and assessment of 
public policies and guarantee the integrity of public service and those who 
perform  it  by  processing  considerable  amounts  of  information,  organised 
into databases (big data).

2.1. Definition of open data on judicial decisions

22.
First of all, let us redefine the notion of open data before dealing with 
the question of the impact of allowing open data on judicial activity. Firstly, 
there is often confusion between access to information and access to data 
(more precisely, access to information in the form of database)12.

23. A  certain  amount  of  public  information,  requiring  wide  publicity,  is 
already disseminated using information technology. In France, the govern-
ment site Légifrance.fr is the main online source of certified public informa-
tion, comprising not only legislative and regulatory texts but also case-law 
and information on appointments to public posts. This unitary information, 
although available on the Internet, differs completely from direct access to 
data organised and included in a database that can be downloaded and pro-
cessed by a computer.

24. Open  data  therefore  only  involves  the  dissemination  of “raw”  data  in 
structured computer databases. These data, aggregated in whole or in part 
with other structured sources, constitute what we call big data. The Coun-
cil  of  Europe  Convention  108  Consultative  Committee  defines  big  data  as 
“the growing technological ability to collect, process and extract new and 
predictive  knowledge  from  great  volume,  velocity,  and  variety  of  data.  In 
terms of data protection, the main issues do not only concern the volume, 
velocity, and variety of processed data, but also the analysis of the data using 
software  to  extract  new  and  predictive  knowledge  for  decision-making 

12. The data are meaningless letters and numbers. Information is data included in a context. 
It is the context that gives meaning to the data. We can guess that 2005 is a year, but with-
out context, we do not know. But in “in 2005, we completed 3 projects” the context gives 
meaning to the number. Therefore, ‘open data’ is not data in the sense of the definition, 
but information. Similarly, large data are also large amounts of information, not data.

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 19

purposes regarding individuals or groups. For the purposes of these Guide-
lines, the definition of Big Data therefore encompasses both Big Data and Big 
Data analytics”.13

25. As  this  definition  shows,  open  data  should  not  be  confused  with 
their  means  of  processing.  Some  of  the  discourse  on  this  issue  actually 
relates  to  processing  carried  out  by  various  advanced  methods  which  are 
generally  defined  as  data  science.  Predictive  justice  using  artificial  intelli-
gence,  advanced  search  engines  applying  extremely  precise  criteria  and 
legal robots are all algorithmic applications which are fed with data but have 
nothing to do with the policy of open data itself.

26. However, this policy must be examined in the light of the possibilities 
it offers for further processing, whatever its nature. If certain data are filtered 
upstream,  taking  account  for  example,  of  the  need  for  confidentiality  and 
respect for privacy, subsequent risks of misuse appear to be reduced.

2.2. State of development of open data on judicial 

decisions in Council of Europe member States and 
consequences for the development of case law

27. What is the situation of the Council of Europe member States as regards 
open  data  on  judicial  decisions?  The  2016-2018  CEPEJ  evaluation  cycle 
focused for the first time on the question of court decisions being provided 
in open data, for which some AI processing is used. The issue of data anony-
misation or pseudonomysation within the European data protection frame-
work14 provided by the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR, EU Regu-
lation 2016/679) and Council of Europe Convention No. 108 was the subject 
of  a  specific  question  designed  to  identify  the  measures  implemented  by 
member States and observers in this particularly sensitive area.

13. T-PD(2017)1, Guidelines on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of 

personal data in a world of big data.

14. General Data Protection Regulations (DGPS, EU Regulation 2016/679, and Council of Europe 
Convention No 108 for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing 
of Personal Data).

Page 20 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

Figure 1. Table showing CoE member States having introduced open data on 
judicial decisions in 2016 (Q62-4 of the evaluation scheme) 

Yes
No

Not a membre of CdE
Data not supplied

MAR

ISR

28. Of all the States and observers surveyed, only 5 declared that they had 
not implemented an open data policy for judicial decisions in 2016. While 
this response rate should be put into perspective, since some answers con-
fused  public  access  to  decisions  with  open  data  (Armenia,  Belgium,  Bos-
nia and Herzegovina, Luxembourg, Russian Federation, Spain, Turkey), it 
reveals, on the one hand, a desire for transparency on the part of European 
judicial  institutions  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  desire  on  the  part  of  many 
countries to make court decisions public and thus make it possible to deal 
with them later using AI tools. This also requires efforts by the institutions 
concerned, since a number of technical measures must be put in place to this 
end. In France specifically, some administrative case law is already available 
for download on the site data.gouv.fr (see below).

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 21

29. With regard to the protection of personal data, 23 countries declared 
that  they  are  pseudonymising15  at  least  some  types  of  disputes  (e.g.  per-
sonal status, family status) by erasing data making the parties or witnesses 
identifiable (names, addresses, telephone numbers, identity numbers, bank 
account numbers, tax numbers, health status, etc.). This work appears to be 
the  responsibility  of  judicial  personnel  (e.g.  Israel,  Republic  of  Moldova) 
or  public  officials  (e.g.  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  Spain).  Bosnia  and  Her-
zegovina and Hungary on the other hand stated to publish the names of 
professionals.

30. However, there is a real difficulty in measuring the impact of open data 
on the efficiency and quality of justice. As indicated above, the initiative to 
re-use  these  data  is  essentially  private,  targeting  a  professional  clientele 
(lawyers, legal departments), and an exclusively intergovernmental activity 
is probably not the best means of fully identifying such positive results.

31.
The situation in France is representative of the questions raised by this 
approach and reveals a number of the issues at stake. First of all, it is import-
ant to underline that France enacted legislation in 2016 imposing a compul-
sory framework for the open data dissemination of decisions on its courts.

32. Articles  20  and  21  of  the  Law  for  a  Digital  Republic16  broke  with  the 
previous  logic17  of  selecting  which  decisions  from  judicial  and  administra-
tive courts and tribunals were to be disseminated if they were “of particular 
interest”.  Under  the  new  French  law,  however,  the  opposite  principle  that 
everything is publishable has been set, except in specific cases identified by 
law  (for  judicial  decisions)  and  with  due  regard  for  the  privacy  of  the  per-
sons concerned. Provision is made, however, for judicial and administrative 
decisions to be published only after an analysis has been made of the risk of 
re-identification of the persons involved.

15. As defined by the T-PD in its “Guidelines on the protection of individuals with regard to 
the processing of personal data in a world of big data” T-PD(2017)1, pseudonymisation 
refers to the processing of personal data “in such a manner that the personal data can no 
longer be attributed to a specific data subject without the use of additional information, 
provided that such additional information is kept separately and is subject to technical 
and organisational measures to ensure that the personal data are not attributed to an 
identified or identifiable natural person.”

16. This law was adopted in order to bring French law into line with Directive 2013/37/EU of the 
European Parliament and of the European Council of 26 June 2013, which in turn amended 
the Council Directive of 17 November 2003 on the re-use of public sector information (the 
“PSI Directive”).

17. Article R433-3 of the Code of judicial organisation

Page 22 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

33.
There are numerous advantages to wide dissemination, promoted in 
particular by the Court of Cassation at two conferences in October 2016 and 
February 2018. They include greater awareness of judicial activity and case 
law trends, the increased quality of a justice system that knows it is being 
observed and the creation of a completely new factual reference base. 

34.
This theoretical desire to “regulate” case-law through digital leverage 
raises however a number of general questions that are relevant to all coun-
tries considering a similar approach. Firstly, it should be placed in the context 
of some of the principles set out by the European Court of Human Rights in 
cases of differences in domestic case-law. The Court clearly emphasises the 
need  to  balance  legal  certainty,  which  makes  decisions  more  predictable, 
against vitality in judicial interpretation.18

This desire is also tempered by several aspects, of technical nature in 

35.
first place:

a. Collection of all judicial decisions eligible for publication is not nec-
essarily well co-ordinated between all levels of courts: some of the 
business applications in European courts have not been designed for 
this, particularly as regards first instance decisions, and some countries 
will have to set up new processes for collating judgments if they want 
collection to be exhaustive;

b. Despite  some  promising  developments,  a  fully  effective  automated 
post-identification mechanism that can prevent any risk of identifi-
cation or re-identification has not yet been devised;

And equally substantive aspects:

c. Thought should be given to the transformation of the very logic of 
the production of case-law. What is the value of the “standard” result-
ing from the number of decisions given on a specific matter? Does this 
“standard” add to the law? If so, is this a new source of law?

d. Should judges be asked to provide additional explanations for deci-
sions  to  deviate  from  this  norm?19  This  question  is  not  insignificant 
and does not prompt the same reply in all judicial systems. In French 
civil law,20 “judges settle disputes in accordance with the rules of law 
applicable thereto”. In the French context, if they were asked to justify 
their  decisions  by  providing  all  the  reasons  for  which  they  deviated 

18. Greek Catholic parish Lupeni and Others v. Romania [GC]. No. 76943/11, 29/11/2016, § 116.
19. Eloi Buat-Menard and Paolo Giambiasi, «La mémoire numérique des décisions judiciaires», 

Dalloz Reports, 2017, p. 1483. (French only)
20. Article 12 of the French Code of Civil Procedure

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 23

from the supposed majority case-law trend on how to resolve the dis-
pute (while complying with the relevant rules of law), would this not 
be tantamount to removing them from office? Judges would not only 
settle  disputes  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  law  but  also  in  accor-
dance with case law trends derived from statistics compiled by a digital 
tool (which could also be biased or developed without external control 
by a private operator, see sections 6.1 and 9 below). The question that 
arises goes far beyond a specific national feature, relating more broadly 
to the place of AI tools in judges’ decision-making processes. Note that 
this analysis is limited to a processing of case-law by algorithms and in 
no way refers to the role of case-law in the sources of law or the author-
ity of case-law precedents, which, moreover, are well established prin-
ciples at European level.21

e. Moreover,  would  it  not  be  the  case  that  if  norms  were  established 
according  to  the  majority  trend,  judicial  decisions  would  be  ren-
dered uniform, and no longer be ordered according to the hierarchy 
of the courts from which they emanate, disregarding the significance 
of the decisions of supreme courts, which are the guarantors of the 
uniform interpretation of law in many European States? What would 
the  relationship  be  between  norms  and  case-law?  Since  they  derive 
from the majority, would they become a criterion for these courts when 
determining their own case-law, which they would in turn have to jus-
tify when they deviate from the majority view?

f. Finally,  isn’t  there  a  risk  of  court  decisions  being  written  down 
according to a reproductive logic? While court decisions are likely to 
evolve according to the evolution of a normative framework (national, 
European  or  international),  the  case  law  available  for  reference  (for 
example,  from  supreme  courts  and  European  courts)  or  the  socio-
economic  context,  would  not  the  norm  resulting  from  the  majority 
become  a  standard  to  which  judges  would  be  encouraged  to  refer 
without question, with an induced effect of the excessive standardisa-
tion of judicial decisions?

36. Doubts  might  also  be  raised  about  the  consequences  for  users, 
who are supposed to benefit directly from the transparency of activities: 
will they really benefit from the publication of all judicial decisions on the 

21. The ECJ has stated, on the conditions governing the liability of a Member State for the 
content of a decision of a supreme national court, that “an infringement of Community 
law will be sufficiently serious” and must give rise to compensation for the damage “where 
the decision concerned was made in manifest breach of the case-law of the Court in the 
matter” (ECJ, Case C-224/01, Koebler, §56).

Page 24 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

Internet or are they not more likely to find themselves overwhelmed by the 
mass  of  decisions,  without  necessarily  deriving  qualitative  benefits  from 
them, for lack of legal knowledge and the critical apparatus to analyse them?

37. Paradoxically enough, one may wonder of open data be in position of 
delivering meaningful information since it will certainly make it possible to 
download a considerable set of raw data with a simple click on a link, but the 
meaning will remain totally obscure for the majority of citizens. 

38.
The first requirement for open data to be transparent and informative 
is for third parties to be able to use them for analysis and development. An 
economic model in which public case law data, which are the subject of work 
by  judicial  authorities  in  order  to  make  them  technically “readable”  by  the 
AI and compliant with the legal requirements for the protection of personal 
data, would be processed free of charge by the private sector and then sold 
by to the courts, professionals and citizens, therefore deserves to be ques-
tioned and even criticised.

2.3. Protection of personal data in open data policies for 

judicial decisions 

2.3.1.  The names of parties and witnesses

39.
In order to strike a fair balance in the digital age between the need to 
make judicial decisions public and respect for the fundamental rights of par-
ties or witnesses, their names and addresses must not appear in published 
decisions, particularly in view of the risk of misappropriation and re-use of 
such personal information and the particular sensitivity of the data likely to 
be contained in the decisions.22Automated processes can be used to system-
atically to conceal such information.

40. Other identifying information may also be obscured (for example, tele-
phone  numbers,  e-mail  addresses,  dates  of  birth,  children’s  given  names, 
rare  given  names,  nicknames  and  place  names).  In  terms  of  personal  data 
protection  principles,  this  concealment  amounts  to  a  simple  pseudonymi-
sation of the data, not complete anonymisation. The volume and variety of 
information contained in court decisions, combined with the growing ease 

22. ECHR, Z. v. Finland No. 22009/93, §§95 et seq. and the European Commission’s Green Paper 
on public sector information in the information society (COM(1998)585) (“If special pre-
cautions are not taken, case-law databases, which are legal documentation instruments, 
can become information files on individuals if these databases are consulted to obtain a 
list of court judgments on a specific individual rather than to find out about case-law”).

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 25

of cross-referencing with other databases, makes it impossible, in practice, to 
guarantee that the person concerned cannot be re-identified. In the absence 
of such a guarantee, these data cannot be qualified as anonymous and are 
therefore subject to personal data protection rules.

41.
Some  especially  sensitive  items  of  personal  data  warrant  particular 
attention, as provided for in Article 6 of Convention 108. This applies to data 
revealing ethnic or racial origin, political opinions, trade union membership, 
religious or other beliefs, physical or mental health or sex life, which are con-
sidered intimate details. 

42. Court decisions may contain other, very varied, types of personal data 
that fall into this category of sensitive data. Courts dealing with criminal mat-
ters are particularly likely to process sensitive data such as those on criminal 
proceedings and convictions. All this sensitive data therefore deserves spe-
cial  vigilance. Their  mass  dissemination  would  present  serious  risks  of  dis-
crimination, profiling23 and violation of human dignity. 

2.3.2.  The names of professionals, including judges

43. Obviously, knowing how a judgment will be arrived at is an essential 
element for lawyers in predicting the outcome of a case, and they believe 
that knowing one’s judge is sometimes almost as important as knowing the 
law. They have long tried to make comparisons between panels of judges, 
more or less empirically, so as to give better advice to clients dealing with a 
particular judge or panel of judges.

44.
This method was sufficient when a lawyer was only speaking before a 
limited number of courts, but the gradual loosening of local restrictions on 
the  bar  in  many  countries  and  the  freedom  to  move  and  work  within  the 
European Union make it reasonable for any national or even European law-
yer to want to know the case-law of each national or European jurisdiction in 
which he is likely to plead in full detail. 

45. We cannot therefore exclude the possibility that, in the future, highly 
useful,  and  hence  very  expensive,  machine  learning  applications  will  be 
much more effective than the experience and “good sense” of litigation law-
yers working through cases in the traditional way. The use of such applica-
tions could further accentuate the distortion of competition and inequality 

23. Profiling is defined in section 4 of the GDPR. It is processing an individual’s personal data 
in order to analyse and predict his/her behavior or his/her situation, such as determining 
his/her performance at work, financial situation, health, preferences, lifestyle habits, etc.

Page 26 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

of arms between law firms that have or have not used such “predictive” case-
law analysis software.

There is a real risk that, for the sake of such a competitive advantage, 
46.
the principle of a fair trial established by law will be undermined. The possi-
bility of judge profiling through cross-referencing of public and private data 
could  allow  private  companies  and  their  lawyers  to  engage  in  even  more 
forum shopping practices. This tactic has already been observed for a long 
time in the United States and in France for press offences and violations of 
privacy in the press, where plaintiffs have already been known to choose the 
court which appears to award the highest amounts of damages and interest.

In addition, much of the discourse on this subject confuses open data 
47.
with the need to publish a certain amount of public information. As a result it 
is sometimes argued that the names of professionals should appear in open 
data for the sake of publicity and transparency.

48. However, the provision of computerised case-law data is a totally sep-
arate issue from the principles of publication of original or certified copies 
of decisions. The objective of open data is to allow automated processing of 
case-law under a low-cost operating licence. As stated previously, this pro-
vision is made in the form of a comprehensive computer database, which is 
opaque and not directly understandable to citizens.

49.
This  provision  obviously  does  not  meet  the  need  to  publicise  the 
names of professionals who have contributed to a specific decision. It should 
be noted that, in law, mentioning the names of judges in judicial decisions 
is a common obligation for member States, in connection with the principle 
of public trial set out in Article 6(1) of the European Convention on Human 
Rights, in order to ensure the objective impartiality of judges (who must be 
identifiable, and lawfully appointed and assigned to the duties they perform) 
and compliance with procedural rules (e.g. publicity and collegiality).24

50.
The answer to the question of the legitimacy or not of publishing the 
names  of  professionals25  in  open  data  therefore  has  nothing  to  do  with 
the obligation to publish the names of professionals in decisions. Rather, it 

24. ECHR, Vernes v. France, No. 30183/06 as regards the identification of the judges who 
rendered the decision, Pretto v. Italy, No. 7984/77 for the publication of the judgment, 
Kontalexis v. Greece, No. 59000/08, § 38, DMD GROUP, a.s, v. Slovakia, No. 19334/03, § 66, 
Miracle Europe KFT v. Hungary, No. 57774/13, § 58 for the right to a court established by 
law in conjunction with the right to an impartial judge.

25. These questions may also apply to Rechtspfleger who make judicial decisions and to clerks, 
assistants to the judge mentioned in the composition of the formation of the court (albeit 
to a lesser extent).

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 27

seems that the challenge lies in reconciling often conflicting requirements: 
making public activities transparent by allowing citizens to know and evalu-
ate their judges, on one hand, while protecting the privacy of professionals 
(whose functions should not limit their fundamental guarantees in this field), 
on the other hand. There are rigorous challenges where it comes to guaran-
teeing  the  impartiality  of  judges  and  even  judicial  institutions  as  a  whole, 
which  open  data  policies  are  actually  designed  to  meet26.  What  practical 
measures can be taken to protect them from potential attempts at destabi-
lisation  which  cross-reference  judges’  personal  data  included  in  databases 
with other sources (social networks, commercial sites) to try to identify hypo-
thetical political, religious and other biases? 

51.
These questions do not arise in the same form everywhere in Europe 
and depend on the specific features of the judicial system concerned (and on 
the nature of the judiciary’s career management body), the collegial nature 
or not of the judgment and the level of court concerned. In Switzerland, for 
example, where judges are elected, publication is a guarantee of transpar-
ency and social responsibility of judges vis-à-vis citizens and political groups. 
This information is already available in online search engines (which are not 
strictly speaking open data).27

52. Nor do these questions arise in the same form depending on the level 
of jurisdiction. The value of characterising the case-law of lower court judges 
may not be the same as for judges of supreme courts or international courts. 
For example, the European Court of Human Rights authorises searches for 
judgments by the names of the judges members of the decision panel, but 
does not allow the calculation of statistics relating to a particular judge.28 On 
the  other  hand,  in  countries  where  the  judicial  bodies  are  unfamiliar  with 
the practice of dissenting opinions (existing within this international court), 
it may seem unfair to assign a judge personal responsibility for a decision 
which he voted against during deliberation in a collegial court.

53.
These  debates  were  well  defined  by  a  study  mission  conducted  in 
France by Professor Loïc Cadiet. The conclusions of the mission remain lim-
ited since they do not recommend prohibiting publication but reserving it 
for  certain  types  of  litigation  and  ruling  it  out  for  others  (for  example,  for 

26. See ECHR Previti v. Italy, No. 45291/06, §§ 249 et seq., which recalls the principles of objective 

impartiality of the judge.

27. See the example of the Swiss Federal Court, whose case-law can be downloaded: https://
www.bger.ch/fr/index/juridiction/jurisdiction-inherit-template/jurisdiction-recht.htm; or, 
for the cantons: http://ge.ch/justice/dans-la-jurisprudence (Canton of Geneva for example).
28. The decisions of the European Court of Human Rights are collegial. Publications include 

any dissenting opinions.

Page 28 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

specialised  criminal  matters). The  possibility  of  publishing  only  the  names 
of supreme court judges was proposed, although it was conceded that this 
might result in a “one-way trip”. 

54. As it stands, a simple precautionary principle could be applied in order 
to assess the interest, by type of litigation and degree of jurisdiction, in pub-
lishing the names of professionals in a downloadable database. Likewise, we 
cannot rule out the possibility of judicial institutions themselves or autho-
rised third parties exploiting this information outside the open-data context 
to find out about case-law.

55.
 Publication of this sort would in any event still need to be examined 
in light of applicable international European rules on the protection of per-
sonal data, such as those of Convention No. 108 and the European Union’s 
GDPR and Directive 680/2016.

3. Operating characteristics of artificial intelligence 
(machine learning) applied to judicial decisions

Natural language processing and machine learning are the two techniques at the 
heart of processing of judicial decisions using artificial intelligence.
heart of processing of judicial decisions using artificial intelligence.

In most occasions, the objective of these systems is not to reproduce legal reason-
In most occasions, the objective of these systems is not to reproduce legal reason-
ing but to identify the correlations between the different parameters of a decision 
ing but to identify the correlations between the different parameters of a decision 
(for example, in a divorce claim the length of marriage, the income of spouses, the 
(for example, in a divorce claim the length of marriage, the income of spouses, the 
existence of adultery, the amount of the benefit pronounced, etc.) andn, through 
existence of adultery, the amount of the benefit pronounced, etc.) andn, through 
the  use  of  machine  learning,  to  infer  one  or  more  models.  Such  models  would 
the  use  of  machine  learning,  to  infer  one  or  more  models.  Such  models  would 
then be used to “predict” or “foresee” a future judicial decision.
then be used to “predict” or “foresee” a future judicial decision.

The  purpose  of  this  chapter  is  to  clarify  the  intrinsic  nature  of  software 
described as “predictive” – sometimes “beta” versions, i.e. in a development 
phase – both in terms of its potential and its limitations. It is intended to pro-
vide a simple explanation of machine-learning algorithms, which are at the 
heart of the automated analysis of case-law.

3.1. The theoretical functionalities of “predictive justice” 

software

56. By way of an introduction, we should briefly review the features prom-
ised by “predictive” software. They propose to establish the probabilities of 
the success (or failure) of a case before a court. These probabilities are estab-
lished through the statistical modelling of previous decisions using methods 
from  two  broad  computer  science  domains:  natural  language  processing 

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 29

and machine learning. These modelling approaches are often referred to as 
AI; in reality, these are “weak” AI (see the glossary, page 

It should be made clear straight away that the term AI is debated by 
57.
experts  as  it  leads  to  many  ambiguities. The  term  AI  has  now  entered  our 
everyday  language  to  describe  a  diverse  range  of  sciences  and  technolo-
gies that allow computers to beat the best champions in the game of Go,29
to drive a car, to converse with humans, etc. Researchers prefer to identify 
the different applictions through the exact technologies underlying them, 
including machine learning, and sometimes refer to all of these highly spe-
cialised AI resources as “weak” (or “moderate”) AIs. These are distinguished 
from an ultimate – still totally theoretical – goal of creating a “strong” AI, i.e. a 
self-learning machine capable of automatically comprehending the world in 
general, in all its complexity.

In relation specifically to justice, predictive justice systems are designed 
58.
for use by legal departments, insurers (both for their internal needs and for 
their policyholders) as well as lawyers for them to anticipate the outcome of 
litigation. Theoretically, they could also assist judges in their decision-making. 

They provide a graphic representation of the probability of success for 
59.
each outcome of a dispute based on criteria entered by the user (specific to 
each  type  of  dispute). These  systems  claim  to  be  capable  to  calculate  the 
likely amount of compensation distributed by the courts.

3.2. The practical functioning of artificial intelligence: 

statistical machines constructing models based on the 
past

60. A distinction must be made from the outset between what is a “predic-
tion” and what is a “forecast”. Prediction is the act of announcing what will 
happen (prae, before – dictare, say) in advance of future events (by supernat-
ural inspiration, by clairvoyance or premonition). Forecasting, on the other 
hand, is the result of observing (aiming, seeing) a set of data in order to envis-
age a future situation. This abuse of language and the spread thereof seems 
to be explained by a transfer of the term from the “hard” sciences, where it 
refers to a variety of data science techniques derived from mathematics, sta-
tistics and game theory that analyse present and past facts to make hypoth-
eses about the content of future events.

29. https://www.nature.com/articles/nature16961

Page 30 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

61.
It should also be noted that the logic of the operation of predictive jus-
tice software is essentially based on either generative (commonly referred 
to as Bayesian) or discriminative methods which eventually try to estimate 
the current or future range of values of a variable (e.g. the outcome of a trial) 
from the analysis of past examples.

62. Generally  speaking,  it  is  also  important  to  keep  in  mind  the  anthro-
pomorphic  notion  that  computing  machines  are  intelligent  and  that  their 
designers have managed to slip a mind inside their mechanisms.30 Unfortu-
nately, this idea still permeates many analyses of predictive justice that lend 
these  devices  immediate  or  future  capabilities  for  the  near  replication  of 
human intelligence. This context, fuelled every day by a further series of rev-
olutionary AI advances,31 therefore leads us all to approach these predictive 
tools with a certain dose, conscious or not, of mysticism, sometimes stating 
that what is not entirely possible today will inevitably be possible tomorrow.

The “strong”  AIs  of  science-fiction  literature  do  not  exist. This  type  of 
63.
AI, which would be equipped not only with intelligence but also with con-
science,  remains  purely  fictional.  The  machine  learning  systems  currently 
being developed are described as “weak” AIs and are capable of extracting 
complex patterns and learning from large volumes of data efficiently and 
often with high levels of predictive accuracy.

64.
To overcome any instinctive or fantasised considerations, these infor-
mation  processing  and  analysis  technologies  must  be  understood  on  the 
basis of the following three concepts.

– AI is not a single, homogeneous object: it is actually an assemblage of 
sciences and techniques (mathematics, statistics and computer science) 
capable of processing data to design very complex computer processing 
tasks. 

– AI engines do not produce intelligence per se but proceed using an 
inductive approach: the idea is to associate in a nearly automated way a 
set of observations (inputs) with a set of possible results (outputs) using 
various preconfigured properties. Specifically for predictive justice, the 
engine builds links between the different lexical groups composing 
judicial decisions. These groups are correlated between those identified 

30. Dominique Cardon, A quoi rêvent les algorithmes, nos vies à l’heure des big data, La République 

des idées, Editions du Seuil, 2015, p. 58.

31. “AlphaZero : l’IA de DeepMind apprend et maîtrise le jeu d’échecs en moins de 4 heures”, 
Génération NT, article published on 8 December 2017, [Online], https://www.generation-
nt.com/alphazero-ia-deepmind-maitrise-echecs-4-heures-actualite-1948919.html (page 
accessed on 14 December 2017).

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 31

at the input stage (facts and reasoning) and those at the output stage 
(the operative part of the decision) then classified.

– The reliability of the model (or function) built strongly depends on the 
quality of the data used and the choice of machine learning technique.

65.
It is worth returning briefly to the ancestors of these systems – expert 
systems – which for their part relied on processing rules written by a com-
puter scientist. Expert systems (ES) developed rapidly in the late 1980s and 
1990s,  especially  in  medicine  and  finance.32  These  systems  were  able  to 
answer specialised questions and reason using known facts, executing pre-
defined encoding rules in an engine. Despite the success of ESs, such as Deep 
Blue against Garry Kasparov in a series of chess games in 1997, these systems 
ended up failing, notably because they were unable to interpret “the infinite 
variety of situations and contexts”33 and became ineffective beyond 200 to 
300  encoding  rules,  both  in  terms  of  execution  performance  and  mainte-
nance (the reasoning followed by the system became almost impossible to 
apprehend for its designers).

Fig. 2: The old expert systems were programmed with rules reproducing the 
logic of legal reasoning

Rules/Templates  

Data  

Expert
system

Results  

32. An example is High Frequency Trading (HFT), which is a type of financial transaction car-
ried out at high speed by software based on algorithms. In 2013 and in Europe, 35 % of 
transactions were already carried out with HFT. In the USA, HFT represents 70 % of trading 
volumes on the equity market. In view of the automation of transactions, the fall is even 
faster in the event of crashes, as was the case during the 2007 financial crisis.

33. Hubert Dreyfus, What Computers Still Can’t Do. A Critique of Artificial Reason, Cambridge, 
The MIT Press, 1992 cited by Dominique Cardon in A quoi rêvent les algorithmes, nos vies à 
l’heure des Big Data, p.59.

Page 32 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

66.
Today, the idea is no longer to write reasoning rules mirroring human 
reasoning, as with older expert systems,34 but to let machine learning sys-
tems themselves identify existing statistical models in the data and match 
them to specific results. 

Fig. 3: Machine learning alone produces models by automatically searching 
for correlation results

Rules/Templates  

Data  

Machine
learning

Results  

In doing so, these systems do not reproduce or model reasoning (such 
67.
as  legal  reasoning).  For  example,  today’s  online  translators  do  not  carry 
out  abstract  reasoning.  They  infer  a  probable  estimate  of  the  best  match 
between  groups  of  lexical  structures  and  translations  already  done.  Users’ 
actions obviously contribute to the improvement of the match search, but 
the machine learning algorithm does not actually perform a translation by 
understanding the meaning of the sentences processed.35

68.
This example shows how the approach of lawyers and researchers can 
be different: a lawyer will seek to understand the effectiveness of pre-exist-
ing rules, which the researcher can only provide through the language of his 
science, and this is sometimes limited to interpreting thousands of parame-
ters from a machine learning system.

69. Machine  learning  is  a  field  of  computer  science  in  which  computer 
programmes learn from experience. Algorithms make a machine perform a 

34. Written processing rules could be based on specific code in different programming lan-
guages such as LISP or editors to model rules. See for example Radboud Winkels, “CLIME : 
Un projet de développement de serveurs juridiques intelligents”, in Danièle Bourcier, Patricia 
Hasset and Christophe Roquilly (eds.), Droit et intelligence artificielle, 2000, Romillat, p. 59.
35. Li Gong, “La traduction automatique statistique, comment ça marche ?”, Interstices.info, 
published on 29 October 2013, [Online], https://interstices.info/jcms/nn_72253/la-traduction-
automatique-statistique-comment-ca-marche (page accessed on 14 December 2017).

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 33

training process, like a child learning in its environment. In summary, these 
learning techniques may or may not be supervised by a human. The most 
prominent category of machine learning is currently that of reinforcement 
learning:  the  machine  alone  reaps  virtual “rewards”  if  action  produces  the 
expected result in a given environment. Machine learning methods include 
neural  networks  (or  their  more  complex  version  known  as  deep  learning), 
which have been quite widely publicised in view of their autonomy and their 
quite  striking  applications,  such  as  the  one  succeeding  in  obtaining  high 
scores  on  old  Atari  2600  video  games36  (based  solely  on  pixel  positioning 
and scores). Other practical applications for these technologies are already 
affecting  our  daily  lives  and  are  beginning  to  appear  in  the  professional 
world of justice.37

70. However, these algorithms remain highly specialised in one particular 
task and present discernment problems when faced with chaotic situations 
or with insufficient data to allow prediction (such as the actual understand-
ing  of  natural  language).  In  the  social  sciences,  to  which  law  and  justice 
belong, failure would even appear inevitable in the absence of a convincing 
model  of  cognition.  For  Pierre  Lévy,  artificial  intelligence  is  in  fact  content 
to provide a heterogeneous toolbox (logical rules, formal syntaxes, statisti-
cal methods, neural or socio-biological simulations, etc.) that does not offer 
a  general  solution  to  the  problem  of  mathematical  modelling  of  human 
cognition.38  Thus,  real  predictive  learning  should  in  reality  be  based  on  a 
good systemic representation of the world, which AI researcher Yann LeCun 
believes is a fundamental scientific and mathematical issue, not a question 
of technology.39

71. Moreover,  the  uniqueness  of  current  big  data  processing  systems  is 
that  they  do  not  attempt  to  reproduce  our  cognition  model  but  produce 
context statistics on an unprecedented size of data, without any real guaran-
tee of excluding false correlations.40

36. https://www.nature.com/articles/nature14236
37. Artificial intelligence by IBM Watson providing a service to the medical field and providing 
a search tool called “Ross”, presented as a virtual lawyer – Roos, “Do more than humanly 
possible” [Online], http://rossintelligence.com (page accessed on 14 December 2017).
38. Pierre Lévy, “Intelligence artificielle et sciences humaines”, Pierre Levy’s blog. 8 October 
2014. [Online], https://pierrelevyblog.com/2014/10/08/intelligence-artificielle-et-scienc-
es-humaines/ (page accessed on 30 December 2017). 

39. Yann LeCun, “Qu’est-ce que l’intelligence artificielle”, research published on the Collège 
de  France  website,  [Online],  https://www.college-de-france.fr/media/yann-lecun/
UPL4485925235409209505_Intelligence_Artificielle__Y._LeCun.pdf (page accessed on 
14 December 2017).

40. Dominique Cardon, op. cit., p.60.

Page 34 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

72. While it is commonly accepted that statistical and probabilistic models 
are  improved  by  increasing  the  data  feeding  them,  some  mathematicians 
have warned of the risks of increasing false correlations (i.e. links between 
factors  having  absolutely  no  causal  link)  in  big  data.  The  mathematicians 
Cristian Sorin Calude and Giuseppe Longo point to the risk of a deluge of 
false  correlations  in  big  data:  the  larger  a  database  used  for  correlations, 
the  greater  the  chances  of  finding  recurrent  patterns  and  the  greater  the 
chances of making errors.41 What may appear as regularities for an AI (recur-
rent links between different data, concepts, contexts or lexical groups) may 
actually be random. Even if the argument of the two mathematicians should 
not be generalised too hastily, they note that in certain vast sets of numbers, 
points or objects, regular random patterns appear and it seems impossible 
to distinguish them algorithmically from patterns revealing causalities.42

Lastly, algorithms, whatever their current level of sophistication, still auto-
73.
matically boil down to the interactions established in the learning phase and 
hence to their past. The content and quality of the data flows used in the compo-
sition of the calculations is therefore fundamental in understanding the results 
obtained and in identifying possible analytical biases. There are many challenges 
here again since, in an exhaustive approach, the analysis of the greatest possible 
amount of data relating to an activity will produce results whose meaning has 
to be clarified with regard to all the factors that have had an influence. In a more 
restrictive approach in which incoming data is sampled, risks will also arise from 
the trade-off biases required to select one data over another.

4. Can artificial intelligence model 
legal reasoning in advance?

Artificial  intelligence  circumvents  the  difficulties  encountered  with  older  expert 
systems: they do not attempt to manually mirror legal reasoning, whose reproduc-
systems: they do not attempt to manually mirror legal reasoning, whose reproduc-
tion is not in itself an objective for them. Machine learning leads to categorisations 
tion is not in itself an objective for them. Machine learning leads to categorisations 
between the different parameters identified by the designers or those discovered 
between the different parameters identified by the designers or those discovered 
by the machine.
by the machine.

74. Continental legal systems are far removed from the ideal of rational-
ity that embodied, for example, the 1804 Civil Code in France. There are a 
multitude of sources that do not fit together perfectly and which relate to 

41. Cristian Sorin Calude, Giusseppe Longo, “Le déluge des corrélations fallacieuses dans le 
big data”, in Bernard Stiegler (dir.) (2017), La toile que nous voulons, FYP editions, p.156.
42. Theory of “Ramsey”, Ronald L. Graham, Joel H. Spencer – “Ramsey Theory”, Scientific American, 
vol.263, No.1, July 1990, p112-117 cited by Cristian Sorin Calude, Giusseppe Longo, “Le 
déluge des corrélations fallacieuses dans le big data”, ibid.

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 35

a set of rules whose meaning remains undetermined, which the legal the-
orist Herbert L. A. Hart called the “open texture of law”.43 Common law sys-
tems, although considered more economically efficient because they adapt 
dynamically to new legal needs,44 are also evolving and offer no more legal 
certainty. Legal rules therefore do not evolve in a linear fashion, distinguish-
ing them from empirical laws (those of the “exact sciences”), where each new 
rule  generally  complements  the  previous  ones  and  does  not  invalidate  a 
complete set of reasoning.

75.
It should be stressed that, faced with this general complexity of legal 
systems, the old IT expert systems quickly reached their limits once 200 to 
300 logical rules were nested. The division of the law into rules of production 
was  not  sufficient  to  provide  a  valid  representation  of  the  body  of  knowl-
edge and methods that guide a lawyer.

76. Consequently,  it  has  proved  just  as  impossible  to  model  the  reason-
ing of judges on a computer as it has to model a positive legal system. As 
the theory of law has highlighted, judicial reasoning is above all a matter of 
assessment and interpretation, of the proven and relevant facts of a case, of 
the applicable rules of law (textual or precedents) – the meaning of which 
remains, as has been said, indeterminate –,45 and of the subjective interpreta-
tion by judges of the concept of equity, which should undergo new changes 
in Europe with the requirement of a proportionality review encouraged by 
the European Court of Human Rights.

77. Xavier Linant de Bellefonds has stressed that the complexity of the law 
lies in its teleological and contentious nature: two coherent arguments can 
lead to different judgments according to two different priorities.46

This is because the famous legal syllogism is more a way of presenting 
78.
legal reasoning than its formal translation. It does not reflect the full reason-
ing of the judge, which is in fact made up of a multitude of decision-mak-
ing  factors,  cannot  be  formalised  a  priori,  and  is  sometimes  based  on  his 
discretion: what are the relevant facts? Are these facts proven? Which rule 
applies  to  them? What  is  the  meaning  of  this  rule  with  regard  to  the  case 
to be decided? Which source should prevail between a range of conflicting 

43. Herbert L. A. Hart (1976), Le concept de droit, Saint-Louis university departments, Brussels. 
44. https://www.contrepoints.org/2014/08/15/177160-common-law-contre-droit-civil-

lexperience-francaise-de-lancien-regime

45. On these questions, Michel Troper (2001), La théorie du droit, le droit, l’Etat, PUF, Paris, spec. 

p. 69-84.

46. Xavier Linant de Bellefonds (1994), “L’utilisation des systèmes experts en droit comparé”, 

Revue internationale de droit comparé, Vol. 46, No. 2, p. 703-718.

Page 36 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

sources? The overall consistency of judicial decisions is never achieved and 
is more a matter of an a posteriori account which judges use in their reason-
ing, having more of a function of convincing themselves of the validity of a 
specific solution than of describing strictly and objectively all the stages that 
resulted in the decision made.

79. However, this work of interpretation is precisely what machine learning 
tecnhiques do not do – and do not attempt to do – today, since they carry 
out, as we have seen, automated processing where the correlation of vast 
amounts of information is supposed to replace the understanding of the real 
causalities of a decision. They make not attempt to formalise legal reasoning 
but hope that the models captured by them can anticipate the likely deci-
sions of a judge in similar situations.

80.
The results achieved by AIs are in reality unrelated to the question of the 
legal conformity of a particular solution and cannot discriminate between 
legal and illegal arguments.

81. A review of the work of the University College of London (UCL) on the 
case-law of the European Court of Human Rights confirms this diagnosis. The 
UCL study assumed that a simple automatic learning model could predict the 
outcome of a case with 79 % accuracy for that particular court. The machine 
learning model proved to be more accurate with regard to the descriptive 
part of the facts of the decisions studied than with regard to the reasoning 
relating to the application of the Convention to the case in question.47

82.
The examination of the terms correlated with the finding of a violation 
(with a positive weighting) and those correlated with a non-violation of the 
European Convention on Human Rights (with a negative weighting) sheds 
unambiguous light on the mechanics at work, which is in no way compara-
ble with legal reasoning.

47.  Work on a sample of 584 decisions of the European Court of Human Rights: Nikolaos 
Aletras, Dimitrios Tsarapatsanis, Daniel Preoţiuc-Pietro, Vasileios Lampos, “Predicting 
judicial decisions of the European Court of Human Rights: a Natural Language Processing 
perspective”, published on 24 October 2016, [Online], https://peerj.com/articles/cs-93/ 
(page accessed on 14 December 2017).

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 37

Fig. 4: Illustration of UCL’s work – Theoretical weight allocated to words or 
terms according to their link with findings of violation or non-violation of the 
European Convention on Human Rights

Positive State Obligations: + 13,50 

Treatment by state officials: + 10,20 

Detention conditions: + 11,70 

Enforcement of domestic judgments

and reasonable time: + 11,70 

VIOLATION 

Evidence : - 15,20 

 Sentencing: - 17,40 

Previous violation of article 2 : - 11,40 

Property rights and company claims: - 9,08 

NON VIOLATION 

Page 38 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

83.
The choice of the relevant facts and their interpretation constitute one 
of the elements of the judge’s decision. In other words, the UCL study was in 
reality only able to produce a probability with lexical material largely derived 
from the reasoning and motivation of the judge and not with that assembled 
by the applicant on the basis of frequencies alone. Their AI established thus a 
high probability of correspondence between groups of words and a decision 
that had already been formalised and could only give rise to a limited num-
ber of possible outcomes. Under no circumstances can it alone reproduce 
the reasoning of European judges nor, above all, predict an outcome, on the 
basis, for example, of a future applicant’s raw account before the Strasbourg 
court, whose application will be subject to a very strict admissibility exam-
ination (nearly 70,356 applications were declared inadmissible or struck from 
the list in 2017)48 based largely on the application of standards of assessment 
(importance and seriousness of the complaint, etc.) leaving considerable lee-
way in decision-making. 

5. Can AIs explain judges’ behaviour in retrospect?

An a posteriori explanation of a judge’s behaviour, in particular the revelation of 
bias, would require all the potentially causative factors to be identified through an 
bias, would require all the potentially causative factors to be identified through an 
interpretative framework and a contextualised analysis. The fact that, statistically, 
interpretative framework and a contextualised analysis. The fact that, statistically, 
childcare is more often entrusted to mothers than fathers does not demonstrate 
childcare is more often entrusted to mothers than fathers does not demonstrate 
a bias on the part of judges but reveals the need to mobilise different disciplines 
a bias on the part of judges but reveals the need to mobilise different disciplines 
from the social sciences to shed light on this phenomenon.
from the social sciences to shed light on this phenomenon.

84.
From a scientific point of view, explaining a phenomenon or, as far as 
we are concerned, a piece of human behaviour, amounts to determining the 
causal mechanisms that led to this behaviour using a certain amount of con-
textual data.

85.
This  requires,  in  a  very  schematic  way,  the  preliminary  constitution  of 
an interpretative framework, itself derived from the repeated observation of 
this type of event or behaviour in the presence of certain factors or elements. 
The interpretative framework is made up of the hypotheses or points of view 
adopted by the different social science disciplines. This is an additional analyti-
cal step that can be fed into algorithms, but which they cannot perform alone.

86.
Some legal tech companies went further and thought they could iden-
tify possible personal biases of judges and feed suspicions of bias. The open 
data of the names of certain presiding judges of administrative courts and 

48. Source: 2017 Statistical analysis of CEDH, January 2018.

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 39

administrative courts of appeal in France have made it possible to develop an 
indicator of the rejection rate of appeals against obligations to leave French 
territory taken by the administrative authorities. Some commentators have 
argued fervently that the alleged impartiality of judges was therefore cast 
into doubt by artificial intelligence.

87. But can such interpretations really be achieved on the basis of an algo-
rithmic processing of court decisions? For there to be personal bias in judges’ 
decision-making processes (differing from their personal and public state-
ments in the case concerned) their behaviour, or in this case their decision, 
needs to be determined by their personality traits, opinions or religion. How-
ever, as has been said, such a causal explanation cannot simply be deduced 
from  the  probabilistic  result  provided  by  algorithms.  On  the  contrary,  it 
requires additional analytical work in order to isolate, among the many cor-
related factors (including the identity of members of the panel of judges), 
those that are truly causative. For example, the fact that a family court statis-
tically decides more often that children should live with their mother does 
not  necessarily  reflect  the  judge’s  bias  in  favour  of  women,  but  rather  the 
existence of psychosocial, economic and even cultural factors specific to the 
jurisdiction, such as the working time of each of the parents, their income, 
the  local  availability  of  collective  childcare,  whether  or  not  the  child  is  in 
school, whether or not one of the parents is in a new relationship or even 
simply the lack of interest by either parent to take care of a young child.

Similarly, decisions on expulsion from a country given by an adminis-
88.
trative court located near a large detention centre cannot be compared fairly 
with those of a court that deals with such disputes only occasionally.

89.
In addition, regardless of the court’s location, the issue of the case-law 
of a single duty judge who only occasionally deals with a certain type of liti-
gation, but who uses (or ignores) the case law of his colleagues, is particularly 
interesting and may legitimately raise the question of equality of citizens in 
judicial proceedings. However, the focus must remain on the remodelling or 
preservation of the collegial nature of the judicial system rather than classifi-
cation or stigmatisation via machine learning tools.

90. What can be deduced from the personality of the president of a panel 
of judges in a collegial court, when his name is the only nominative informa-
tion visible in open administrative court decisions? 

91.
Furthermore, how can we account for two distinct philosophical and 
cultural approaches to judicial decisions, whereby, in some European coun-
tries, including France, there is a culture of precedent and a detailed knowl-
edge by judges of the factual databases of all 1st and 2nd instance decisions 

Page 40 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

(Ariane database) in the field of administrative justice, while other countries 
or systems favour the intellectual independence of each court, along with a 
desire to deal with each situation on a case-by-case basis?

92. Providing an accurate explanation of a court decision therefore requires 
a much more detailed analysis of the contingent data in each case and the 
applicable rules of law, rather than sustaining a vain hope that the mass of 
links will make sense.

6. How is AI to be applied in civil, commercial 
and administrative justice?

The state of development of machine learning techniques does not allow today to 
reach reliable results regarding the “prediction” of judicial decisions. On the other 
reach reliable results regarding the “prediction” of judicial decisions. On the other 
hand, their application in the field of civil, commercial and administrative justice 
hand, their application in the field of civil, commercial and administrative justice 
is to be considered for the creation of scales or the pre-litigation resolution of dis-
is to be considered for the creation of scales or the pre-litigation resolution of dis-
putes online, when a later appeal to the judge remains possible.
putes online, when a later appeal to the judge remains possible.

93.
 As we can see, the first question raised by such use of artificial intelli-
gence is not so much whether it is beneficial or harmful, desirable or other-
wise, but whether the algorithms proposed can achieve the type of result 
sought. The conclusions from the experiments conducted in the Douai and 
Rennes appeal courts in France clearly demonstrate that in the presence of a 
thought-provoking discourse promoting a product of AI can hide unaccept-
able design flaws and totally erroneous analysis results.

94.
Regardless  of  the  quality  of  the  software  tested,  anticipating  judges’ 
decisions in civil, commercial and administrative matters would appear to be a 
potentially desirable benefit, albeit sometimes for very different reasons, both 
for those responsible for judicial public policy and for private legal professionals.

95. Whatever the legal tradition of the country, legal uncertainty, i.e. the 
risk of having one’s legal claim validated or rejected, prompts the desire to 
be able to quantify these factors using these new technological applications.

96.
Lawyers (or a company’s legal department) see the possibility of using this 
technology to provide their clients with better informed advice by empirically 
and systematically assessing the chances of a procedure’s success, as well as 
encouraging the conclusion of transactions that, if necessary, make it possible 
to avoid a long and costly trial. Some insurers already offer the use of predictive 
systems to their clients to evaluate the merits of their business.49

49. The Predictive software is offered to Allianz policyholders, for example.

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 41

97. At the same time, public decision-makers see this as an opportunity to 
better regulate the flow of new proceedings through the courts and provide 
themselves with a lever to reduce judicial operating costs. This is thought to 
encourage litigants to use alternative dispute resolution methods (concilia-
tion, mediation or arbitration).50

98.
The approach that already exists in many judicial systems of harmonising 
decisions in many matters by using scales (divorce, dismissal, compensation 
for  personal  injury)  could  be  revitalised  through  a  probabilistic  or  actuarial 
approach.51 Alternative online dispute resolution services have even been cre-
ated to help assess the amount of compensation for small disputes, inter alia. 
However, these interesting approaches are not unbiased and must not deprive 
citizens of access to a judge or call into question the adversarial principle.

Experiments conducted in France

At the initiative of the Ministry of Justice, the two courts of appeal in Rennes and 
At the initiative of the Ministry of Justice, the two courts of appeal in Rennes and 
Douai  agreed  to  test  predictive  justice  software  on  various  litigation  appeals  in 
Douai  agreed  to  test  predictive  justice  software  on  various  litigation  appeals  in 
spring 2017, which in reality was an analysis of civil, social and commercial deci-
spring 2017, which in reality was an analysis of civil, social and commercial deci-
sions of all French courts of appeal. 
sions of all French courts of appeal. 

Although these internal and exhaustive case law data had already been available 
Although these internal and exhaustive case law data had already been available 
to them free of charge for many years (JURICA database), the Ministry made them 
to them free of charge for many years (JURICA database), the Ministry made them 
specially  available  to  the  publishing  company  when  they  offered  to  assess  the 
specially  available  to  the  publishing  company  when  they  offered  to  assess  the 
value of a quantified (innovative) analysis of the sums allocated by the two courts, 
value of a quantified (innovative) analysis of the sums allocated by the two courts, 
in addition to a geographical classification of the discrepancies noted for similar 
in addition to a geographical classification of the discrepancies noted for similar 
applications and trials.
applications and trials.

The  stated  objective  of  the  software  was  therefore  to  create  a  decision-making 
The  stated  objective  of  the  software  was  therefore  to  create  a  decision-making 
tool in order to reduce, if necessary, excessive variability in court decisions, in the 
tool in order to reduce, if necessary, excessive variability in court decisions, in the 
name of the principle of equality of citizens before the law. The result of the exper-
name of the principle of equality of citizens before the law. The result of the exper-
iment,  contradictorily  debated  between  the  two  courts  of  appeal,  the  Ministry 
iment,  contradictorily  debated  between  the  two  courts  of  appeal,  the  Ministry 
of Justice and the legal tech company who designed the product unfortunately 
of Justice and the legal tech company who designed the product unfortunately 
stated the absence of added value of the tested version of the software for the 
stated the absence of added value of the tested version of the software for the 
work of reflection and decision-making of the magistrates. 
work of reflection and decision-making of the magistrates. 

More significantly, software reasoning biases were revealed that led to aberrant or 
More significantly, software reasoning biases were revealed that led to aberrant or 
inappropriate results due to confusion between mere lexical occurrences of judi-
inappropriate results due to confusion between mere lexical occurrences of judi-
cial reasoning and the causalities that had been decisive in the judges’ reasoning.
cial reasoning and the causalities that had been decisive in the judges’ reasoning.

50. In this respect see information report No. 495 (2016-2017) prepared on behalf of the Senate 

Law Commission, and tabled on 4 April 2017, by Senator Philippe Bas

51. With respect to the actuarial approach, Case Law Analytics’ offer announces more of a risk 

assessment than a prediction of a solution to a dispute.

Page 42 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

6.1.  A new computing tool to calculate scales

99.
The procedures for calculating scales in various civil matters (for exam-
ple, compensation for bodily injury, compensatory allowance and severance 
pay) appear to be considerably enhanced when combined with other pro-
cessing techniques, subject to numerous design measures and uses (perfor-
mative effect).52

100.
  It  is  important  to  highlight  what  Jean-Paul  Jean,  chair  of  the  CEPEJ 
evaluation working group, described as the qualitative challenge during a 
conference on open data held in 2016 in France: the procedure carried out 
by machine learning or any other method of processing should use certified 
originals, whose integrity has been verified, and which have been enriched 
to distinguish the important from the insignificant.53

101. The other risk already encountered by the designers of these tools is 
that of ‘‘data-snooping’’, namely selecting upstream-only data that is signifi-
cant to predetermined analysis grids, for example by excluding from samples 
decisions that lend themselves poorly to correlations of linguistic sequences 
through machine learning or any other method (for example, decisions with-
out presentation of the litigation or little reasoning).

102. But if we calculate a scale, are we not already doing a little prediction? 
The borderline may seem relatively sketchy unless we clearly distinguish the 
aim of the process: the objective here is not to deliver prescriptive informa-
tion but to provide information about a state of affairs.

103. Subject  to  these  methodological  and  operational  precautions,  the 
scales are available for handling certain disputes and are a powerful tool for 
harmonising case-law. Scales were previously calculated on more or less lim-
ited samples of decisions, but AI tools make it possible to survey more deci-
sions  and  are  liable  to  produce  more  accurate  scales,  applying  a  standard 
and hence giving more weight to the outcomes.

52. The performative or self-realisation effect is the risk that a system will produce the same 
output progressively by influencing the producers of input information; this effect is often 
mentioned with regard to judicial scales which, when informed by decisions based on 
these scales, tend to be representative only of themselves.

53. J-P. Jean, “Penser les finalités de la nécessaire ouverture des bases de données de juris-
prudence”, Conference of 14 October 2016 held at the Court of Cassation, https://www.
courdecassation.fr/IMG///Open%20data,%20par%20Jean-Paul%20Jean.pdf, page accessed 
on 17 March 2018.

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 43

6.2.  Online dispute resolution

104. All European courts face to different degrees repetitive low-value civil 
litigation. The idea of facilitating the procedure through information tech-
nology  and/or  outsourcing  them  from  the  courts  is  quite  widely  shared. 
Great Britain, the Netherlands and Latvia are examples of countries that have 
already implemented or are about to implement these types of more or less 
automated solution54s. For cross-border claims, the European Union has set 
up, by means of Regulation n°524/2013, a common framework available on 
the Internet (European small claims).

105. However, the scope of these online dispute resolution (ODR) services 
seems  to  have  gradually  extended. They  have  gone  from  restricted  online 
services to alternative dispute resolution measures before the complaint is 
brought before the court, and are now being introduced 

increasingly into the court process itself, to the point of offering electronic 
court services’.55 They do not only concern low-value disputes, but also tax dis-
putes or disputes relating to social security services, or divorce proceedings.

106. For those who advocate such solutions, which are of interest to a num-
ber of legal professions and the private sector, access to justice could be sig-
nificantly improved by a broad solution combining ODR and AI (or at least 
expert systems, see section 3 above for the distinction). The idea is to take 
complainants through an automated diagnosis of the dispute by putting a 
number of questions, which are then processed by the machine, resulting in 
proposals for a solution. The work of the Cyberjustice de Montréal laboratory, 
which assembles the various pre-litigation and litigation phases into a com-
puter-based  process  for  low-intensity  disputes  (for  example,  small  claims 
courts in Quebec), is a good illustration of hybridisation.56 According to the 
designers, there are clear benefits in terms of efficiency and quality.

54. See to this end the online dispute resolution available in the UK – https://www.judiciary.
gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Online-Dispute-Resolution-Final-Web-Version1.pdf. 
See also the system PAs in the Netherlands, which issues automated decisions based on 
previously granted permits, and which has given rise to litigation at the national level and 
before the ECJ: there are two cases (c-293/17 en c-294/17) brought to the Council of State 
of the Netherlands (farmers/ nature conservation against the Netherlands) to determine 
whether or not a system (Programme Regulating Nitrogen) is allowed to decide whether 
or not farmers a.o. are violating the Habitat directive. Recently the Court of Justice of the 
European Union in Luxembourg has answered on the requests for a preliminary ruling 
concerning these joined cases (ECLI:EU:C:2018:882)

55. Darin Thompson, “Creating new pathways to justice using simple artificial intelligence and 

online dispute resolution”, Osgoode Hall Law School of York University.

56. http://www.cyberjustice.ca/projets/odr-plateforme-daide-au-reglement-en-ligne-de-litiges/

Page 44 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

107. But on what basis would any compensation proposed by such a system 
be calculated? What method? Does the algorithm process information fairly? 
Is  the  proposal  intended  to  be  discussed  on  an  adversarial  basis  with  the 
help of a trained and certified third party? Is access to a judge always pos-
sible? Some authors even see the widespread use of these dispute resolu-
tion methods as a new manifestation of digital “solutionism”, i.e. the system-
atic use of technologies to try to solve problems that do not necessarily fall 
within their scope.57 It should also be noted that in Europe, a more protective 
regulatory  framework  that  is  binding  on  the  member  States  has  recently 
been  put  in  place:  Article  22  of  the  Data  Safety  Monitoring  Plan  explicitly 
provides for persons to be able to refuse to be the subject of a decision based 
exclusively on automated processing, with certain exceptions.58

57. Evgeny Morozov, “Pour tout résoudre cliquez ici”, FYP editions, cited by David Larrousserie, 
“Contre le ‘solutionnisme’ numérique”, Le Monde, 6 October 2014, https://www.lemonde.
fr/sciences/article/2014/10/06/contre-le-solutionnisme-numerique_4501225_1650684.
html

58. Article 22(1) of EU Regulation 2016/679: “The data subject shall have the right not to be 
subject to a decision based solely on automated processing”; exceptions are provided for 
(such as the data subject’s consent) but “suitable measures to safeguard the data subject’s 
rights and freedoms and legitimate interests “ must be implemented by the controller, 
including “the right of the data subject to obtain human intervention on the part of the 
controller, to express his or her point of view and to contest the decision”.
See, in the same sense, the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals 
with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data, as amended by the Protocol adopted 
in May 2018 when the latter enters into force. Article 9(1)(a) provides the principle that 
“Everyone has the right not to be subject to a decision affecting him significantly, which 
shall be taken solely on the basis of automatic processing of data, without his point of 
view being taken into account. Notwithstanding this principle of prohibition, Article 9(2) 
states that “paragraph 1(a) shall not apply if the decision is authorised by a law to which 
the controller is subject and which also provides for appropriate measures to safeguard 
the rights, freedoms and legitimate interests of the data subject”. 
The explanatory report states (§75): “It is essential that any person likely to be subject to a 
purely automated decision should have the right to challenge that decision by effectively 
putting forward his point of view and his arguments. In particular, the data subject must 
have the possibility to prove the possible inaccuracy of personal data before their use, the 
inadequacy of the profile to be applied to his particular situation or other factors which 
will have an impact on the outcome of the automated decision. This is particularly the 
case when the application of an algorithmic reasoning, by leading to the limitation of a 
right, the refusal of a social benefit or the evaluation of their borrowing capacity on the 
sole basis of the software, has the effect of stigmatizing individuals. However, the data 
subject may not exercise this right if the automated decision is provided for by the law to 
which the controller is subject, which provides for appropriate measures to safeguard the 
rights and freedoms and legitimate interests of the data subject”.
See also Article 9(1)(c) of the modernised Convention 108, which provides for the right 
of the data subject “to obtain, at his request, knowledge of the reasoning underlying the 
processing of data, when the results of such processing are applied to him”. The explanatory 

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 45

108. The potential benefits of an ODR system, its degree of integration into 
a complete judicial process (from pre-litigation to actual litigation) and the 
almost decisive role of AI in the execution of the process must therefore be 
properly assessed on a case-by-case basis.

109. ODR already offers upstream knowledge of judicial processes. Its role 
is clearly to contribute to the implementation of conciliation, mediation and 
arbitration services outside the courtroom. These services can also be used 
during contentious proceedings under the supervision of judges before they 
decide on the outcome of disputes based on the merits (for some disputes 
this phase is considered compulsory).

110. On the other hand, the actual contribution of AI should be assessed. 
Is it only a question of using machine learning to establish indicative scales 
or prescribe a solution? Is it really AI that is being used or an expert system 
or just the logical rule chain? In any event, it should be possible to combine 
these systems with the requirements of transparency, neutrality and loyalty.59

111. Finally, it is also necessary to examine the way in which complainants 
are encouraged to use the system: is there potential confusion in the very 
name  of  what  is  on  offer?  If  one  speaks  of  a  court,  it  must  be  the  form  of 
organisation  defined  by  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and 
not  simply  a  private  justice  institution  with  the  mere  appearance  of  state 
justice60. Is recourse to a judge clearly possible? In the Netherlands, private 
health insurance contracts seem to provide automatically for recourse to an 
ODR before any legal action is brought..

112. The  CEPEJ  Mediation  Working  Group  (CEPEJ-GT-MED),  launched  in 
2018, has offered its first thoughts on the contribution of information 
technology towards alternative dispute resolution methods. The CDCJ 

(cont’d) dreport of the modernised Convention (§77) states: “Data subjects have the right 
to obtain knowledge of the reasoning underlying the data processing, including the 
consequences of this reasoning and the conclusions which may have been drawn from 
it, in particular when using algorithms for automated decision-making, in particular in the 
context of profiling. For example, in the case of a credit rating system, borrowers have the 
right to know the logic behind the processing of their data that leads to the decision to 
grant or refuse credit, rather than simply being informed. 
of the decision itself. Understanding these elements contributes to the effective exercise 
of other essential safeguards such as the right of objection and the right of appeal to the 
competent authority”. This “must obtain useful information concerning the underlying 
logic” is also found in the GDR (Article 13(1)(f ); Article 14(2)(g); Article 15(1)(h)).

59. Charlotte  Pavillon,  “Concerns  over  a  digital  judge”,  nrc.nl,  https://www.nrc.nl/

nieuws/2018/01/19/zorgen-om-populaire-digitale-rechter-a1588963

60. Scarlett-May Ferrié, Algorithmes tested against fair trial, document consulted on http://

lexis360.fr, downloaded on 09/07/2018,§ 27-38

Page 46 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

is currently doing in-depth work on ODRs to identify the potential of 
these  tools  but  also  any  problem  points  amounting  to  possible  vio-
lations of Articles 6, 8 and 13 of the European Convention on Human 
Rights.

6.3. The main guarantees to be reaffirmed in civil, 

commercial and administrative proceedings

Right of access to a court

113. The provision of online dispute resolution tools should not affect the 
right of access to a court within the meaning of Article 6, even if this right 
is  not  absolute  and  lends  itself  to  implicit  limitations.61  In  civil  matters,  for 
example, every litigant has the right to submit to a court any dispute relating 
to his “civil rights and obligations” heard by a court.62 In 2015, the Parliamen-
tary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted a resolution on “Access to 
justice and the Internet: potential and challenges” in which it called to ensure 
that “parties engaging in ODR procedures retain the right to access a judicial 
appeal procedure satisfying the requirements of a fair trial pursuant to Arti-
cle 6 of the Convention’’.63

Adversarial principle

114.
It seems imperative to make a certain amount of quantitative informa-
tion  (for  example,  the  number  of  decisions  processed  to  obtain  the  scale) 
and  qualitative  information  (origin  of  decisions,  representativeness  of 
selected samples, distribution of decisions between different criteria such as 
the economic and social context) accessible to citizens and, above all, to the 
parties to a trial in order to understand how scales have been constructed, to 
measure their possible limits and to be able to debate them before a judge.

Equality of arms

115. The use of technological means should not cause imbalances between 
parties,  since  the  use  of  digital  means  could  indeed  facilitate  proceedings 

61. Art.6 §1 « 1. everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing .. by an independent and 
impartial tribunal… who shall decide (...) the merits of any criminal charge against it..; for 
the limitations see Deweer c. Belgique, § 49 ; Kart c. Turquie [GC], § 67.

62. CEDH, Golder c. Royaume-Uni, §§ 28-36
63. Resolution  2054  (2015)  of  the  Parliamentary  Assembly  of  the  Council  of  Europe 
(PACE), 10 November 2015, http://assembly.coe.int/nw/xml/XRef/Xref-XML2HTML-EN.
asp?fileid=22245&lang=en

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 47

for  certain  operators  (institutions,  companies  with  means,  computer  liter-
ate  persons)  and,  on  the  contrary,  pose  difficulties  for  certain  population 
types that are more uncertain or less familiar with computers. It is important 
that no individuals are left alone in front of their screens, and that they are 
informed that they can seek legal advice and are assisted where necessary.

Impartiality and independence of judges

116.
It  has  been  posited  that  the  norm  derived  from  the  majority  trend 
referred to above in section 2.2. may have indirect effects on the indepen-
dence  and  impartiality  of  the  judiciary,  particularly  in  systems  where  the 
independence of the judiciary is not fully achieved. In these systems, we can-
not rule out the risk that such norms will place indirect pressure on judges 
when decisions are taken and prompt their approval, or that the executive 
will monitor those who depart from the norm.

Right to counsel

At the beginning of this chapter, we mentioned the advantages derived from 
the application of predictive justice tools for lawyers and, in particular, the 
possibility of providing their clients with better informed advice by empiri-
cally and systematically assessing the chances of a procedure’s success. How-
ever, let us imagine a case where the chances of success for the litigant are 
extremely  poor:  could  this  affect  the  lawyer’s  decision  to  assist  his  client? 
Professional practice should aim to minimise the risk that persons requiring 
legal advice may ultimately be deprived of it. 

7. Issues specific to criminal justice: prevention of offences, 
risk of recidivism and assessment of the level of danger

Even they are not specifically designed to be discriminatory, the use of statistics 
and AI in criminal proceedings has shown a risk of prompting the resurgence of 
and AI in criminal proceedings has shown a risk of prompting the resurgence of 
deterministic doctrines to the detriment of doctrines of individualisation of the 
deterministic doctrines to the detriment of doctrines of individualisation of the 
sanction, which have been widely acquired since 1945 in most European judicial 
sanction, which have been widely acquired since 1945 in most European judicial 
systems.
systems.

117. The use of AI science and technology in criminal matters poses specific 
challenges as its application may reflect some current public debates about 
the  alleged  predictability  of  offending  behaviour.  However,  this  debate 
seemed to have been thoroughly settled for some thirty years in a number 
of European countries. In Italy for example, Article 220, paragraph 2, of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure expressly rules out the use of an expert opinion 

Page 48 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

to establish habitual or professional criminal features, the tendency to com-
mit a crime, the character and personality of the accused and, in general, the 
psychological qualities of the accused, regardless of the pathological causes. 
In  France,  for  example,  the  doctrine  of “new  social  defence”  developed  by 
Marc  Ancel  was  the  foundation  of  criminal  law:  instead  of  a  merely  puni-
tive and deterministic approach, a system of social rehabilitation was intro-
duced to prevent the commission of an offence by avoiding the conditions 
for crime. This approach is shared by a number of European criminal policy 
instruments that focus on the objectives of re-educating and reintegrating 
offenders.64

118. Criminal justice tools should therefore be designed in accordance with 
these  fundamental  principles  of  rehabilitation,  65including  the  role  of  the 
judge in the individualisation of the sentence, based on objective elements 
of  personalities  (training,  employment,  regular  medicals  and  social  care) 
without any other form of analysis than that carried out by specifically trained 
professionals, such as probation officers. Big data analytics techniques could 
be used by these professionals to centralise and collect information on the 
person accused of a crime or misdemeanour, which could then be stored by 
various institutions and agencies and would then need to be examined by a 
judge, sometimes within a very short time frame (for example in the context 
of accelerated trial procedures).

7.1. Tools used by investigative authorities before the 

criminal trial

119.
Instruments described as “predictive policing” (before the judicial pro-
cess or before a court referral) are already growing rapidly and are beginning 
to be known by the general public (for example, think of the no fly list, which 
is actually a big data analytics application that collects and analyses data on 
potential terrorists in order to prevent the commission of acts, or algorithms 
used to detect fraud or money laundering). 

In general, a large number of computer tools are commonly used to pre-
120.
vent the commission of criminal acts (by identifying possible places where 
this could happen or their authors) or prosecute them more effectively.66 The 

64. See European Court of Human Rights, Grand Chamber, Vinter and Others vs. United Kingdom, 

paras. 114-118

65. On the other hand, the use of AI for treatment and rehabilitation purposes (e.g. to collect data 
on treatment administered or methods of reintegration in prison) should be encouraged.
66. See Ales Zavrsnik, Big Data, crime and social control, page 194 et seq., which lists in detail 

a series of instruments used by police services in Europe and the United States.

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 49

first category includes “predictive policing” instruments that are used to pre-
vent certain types of offences with elements of regularity in their occurrence 
such as burglary, street violence, theft from/of vehicles. The designation of 
these tools derives from their ability to determine precisely where and when 
these offences could be committed and to reproduce this information on a 
geographical map in the form of hot spots that are monitored in real time 
by police patrols. This process is called predictive criminal mapping. Most of 
the software used in this area is based on historical crime location evidence, 
such as police reports, but even more powerful new technologies combining 
various data and from different sources are also being tested.67 These instru-
ments, which have very persuasive rates of effectiveness, are also claimed to 
have deterrent effects on the commission of offences in areas surrounding 
hot spots, leading to a positive opinion of public policies.68

121. However,  the  predictive  capabilities  of  these  tools,  which  show  their 
limitations with regard to crimes of a less regular nature or targeting different 
locations, such as terrorism, must be put into perspective. In addition, one of 
their weaknesses is the effect of “vicious circles” and “self-fulfilling prophe-
cies”: neighbourhoods considered at risk attract more police attention and 
police detect more crime, which leads to excessive police surveillance of the 
communities living in them.69 Lastly, questions about a possible “tyranny of 
the  algorithm”  that  could  minimise  or  even  progressively  replace  human 
judgment are not totally absent within the police services themselves, even 

67. For example, as part of the project “E-Security – ICT for knowledge-based and predictive 
urban security” (http://www.esecurity.trento.it/), which was conducted in the Italian city 
of Trento between November 2012 and May 2015, a database gathering information on 
crimes reported to the police, the results of surveys conducted by the city hall on victimis-
ation and real and perceived security by citizens, information on physical and social urban 
disorder from the police, as well as other variables relating to “SmartCity” (e.g. information 
relating to the socio-demographic context, urban setting, night lighting, the presence of 
surveillance cameras and public transport). It was created to better equip crime prevention 
and urban safety improvement work. The project managers testified to the reliability of 
the techniques used, which were said to make it possible to predict criminal acts with a 
success rate of approximately 60-65 % and which were said to help to better fight crime 
when limited resources were available. In addition, tests conducted in the United Kingdom 
as part of a pilot project to predict possible burglary, theft, and assault locations show that 
the software projections used, called PREDPOL, were accurate in 78 % of cases, compared 
to 51 % using traditional techniques.

68. Indication of a geographical concentration of the crime would help police forces to better 
consider the environmental factors making the crime more likely in the identified area 
(lighting, presence of shops, etc.) and to plan adequate responses in consultation with 
other partners.

69. “Predicting crime, LAPD style”, The Guardian, 25 June 2014.

Page 50 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

if, for the time being, technology is presented as remaining at the service of 
human beings in order to better equip them for decision-making.70

In  addition,  big  data  analytics  are  increasingly  being  applied  in  the 
122.
prosecution of crime. Tools such as Connect, which is used by the UK police 
to analyse billions of data generated in financial transactions to find correla-
tions  or  patterns  of  operations,  or  the  International  Child  Sexual  Exploita-
tion Database (ICSE DB), managed by Interpol, which helps identify victims 
and/or perpetrators through the analysis, for example, of furniture and other 
objects  in  abusive  images,  or  the  analysis  of  background  noise  in  videos, 
have proven particularly effective in fighting crime. With Connect, for exam-
ple, searches that previously required months of investigation can now be 
performed in minutes, with a very high level of complexity and volume of 
data. 

123. The doctrine nevertheless questions the managerial logic of the crime 
response  provided  by  these  predictive  tools,  in  which  a  thorough  analysis 
of the reasons for the crime becomes less important than doing something 
here and now. This is occurring at a time when available budgets are shrink-
ing and the police must provide the same level of public protection, but with 
limited personnel, equipment and resources.71

7.2. Tools during the criminal trial

124. The use of predictive tools72 by judges in criminal trials is very rare in 
Europe.

125. HART (Harm Assessment Risk Tool) was developed in partnership with 
Cambridge  University  and  is  now  being  tested  in  the  UK. This  technology 
based on machine learning was trained using Durham Police archives dating 
from 2008 to 2012. By learning from decisions made by police officers during 
this period, and whether or not certain suspects reoffended, the machine is 
expected to be able to assess the risk – low, medium or high – of suspects 
reoffending, based on around thirty factors, some of which are not related to 
the crime committed (for example, postal code and gender). 

70. “How technology is allowing police to predict where and when crime will happen”, The 

Independent, 7 October 2017.

71. Ales Zavrsnik, Big Data, crime and social control, page 196.
72. In the literature, these tools are often referred to as “algorithmic justice” or “automated 

justice”, or “simulated justice”.

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 51

126.
In  tests  initially  conducted  in  2013,  during  which  suspect  behaviour 
was observed over a two-year period after commission of the crime, HART 
predictions were found to be 98 % effective at predicting low risk and 88 % 
effective at high risk of recidivism. In this experimental phase, HART will have 
a purely advisory value for the judge. In addition, audits of HART’s function-
ing and the reliability of its conclusions will be regularly conducted by the 
police.

127. Even if it is the only predictive tool identified in Europe to date, it pro-
vides the opportunity to consider the challenges that public decision-mak-
ers could face in the near future if this type of application is tested on a larger 
scale, particularly in the light of findings in America.

In the United States,73 the NGO ProPublica revealed the discriminatory 
128.
effects  of  the  algorithm  used  in  COMPAS  software  (Correctional  Offender 
Management  Profiling  for  Alternative  Sanctions),  which  aims  to  evaluate 
the risk of recidivism when the judge must determine the sentence for an 
individual.

129. This  algorithm,  which  was  developed  by  a  private  company  and 
which must be used by judges in certain American federal states, includes 
137 questions answered by either the defendant or information pulled from 
criminal records. The questions are quite varied and include the presence of 
a telephone at home, difficulty paying bills, family history, criminal history 
of the accused, etc.74 The algorithm rates the person on a scale from 1 (low 
risk) to 10 (high risk). It is an aid to judicial decision-making, its conclusions 
being only one of the variables considered by the judge when deciding on 
the sentence.

130. African-American populations were assigned a recidivism high-risk rate 
twice that of other populations within two years of sentencing – without this 
effect being naturally sought by the designers75. In contrast, the algorithm 
considered  that  other  populations  appeared  much  less  likely  to  repeat  an 

73. A 2015 study had identified about sixty predictive tools in the United States.
74.  There are other algorithms that have been developed using critical observations expressed 
by the doctrine (see next chapter) that are based on smaller variables, more directly related 
to the crime committed and less related to race, gender or socio-economic status. An 
example is the Public Safety Assessment Tool used in 30 American jurisdictions.

75. This purely discriminatory effect can in fact be explained by the relatively permissive 

“calibration” of the algorithm model, which creates many “false positives”.

Page 52 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

offence76. It must of course be noted that this type of misleading interpreta-
tion in reality reveals only the social and economic fragility of certain groups 
of populations which are obviously not criminogenic by nature. Researchers 
at Dartmouth College have also shown that this type of algorithm does not 
produce added value since people without any criminal history can repro-
duce exactly the same assessment simply by answering the questionnaire. 

In  addition,  the  lack  of  transparency  in  the  algorithm  operation  pro-
131.
cesses  designed  by  private  companies  (which  claim  intellectual  property) 
was  another  cause  for  concern.  If  we  take  into  account  the  fact  that  they 
take  their  source  data  from  the  state  authorities  themselves,  their  lack  of 
accountability to citizens poses a major democratic problem. Accounts have 
shown  that  the  public  is  informed  about  big  data  operations  accidentally, 
sporadically and when there are leaks or errors: an example of this is when 
ProPublica revealed the flaws in the COMPAS algorithm following the owner 
company’s refusal to share it. The NGO had to appeal to public authorities to 
access the data and hire its own scientist to examine the algorithm.

7.3. The challenges of “prediction” in criminal matters

132. We have seen in the previous sections that the degree of development 
of  predictive  tools  in  Europe  in  the  criminal  field  is  very  varied.  Although 
instruments  described  as “predictive  policing”  are  growing  rapidly  and  are 
even  beginning  to  come  to  the  attention  of  the  general  public,  the  situa-
tion is not the same when it comes to the application of this type of tool by 

76. Black populations were more frequently classified as high risk, while they did not reoffend 
within two years of conviction; white populations, on the other hand, who were more 
frequently classified as low risk, committed offences within the next two years. In short, 
the algorithm overestimated the risk of recidivism for blacks and underestimated it for 
whites (the “false positives” were mostly blacks, while the “false negatives” were mostly 
whites). In response to ProPublica’s allegations, NorthPointe (now Equivant since this 
controversy) replied that white and black populations were equally represented when 
considering the “true positives”, i.e. those who had actually reoffended. The question of 
how to reconcile both the accuracy of the algorithm in detecting recidivism and the 
need to avoid discriminatory effects towards black populations has been the source of 
intense debate in the literature; see in particular Chouldechova A (2016), “A fair prediction 
with a disparate impact: a study on bias in recidivism prediction instruments”, available at 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.07524; and also “Bias in criminal risks scores is mathematically 
inevitable, Researchers say”, available at https://www.propublica.org/article/bias-in-crimi-
nal-risk-scores-is-mathematically-inevitable-researchers-say. This debate also reflects the 
question of the legitimacy of a private company, without any institutional control, to 
arbitrate between two opposing requirements: that of defending society, on the one 
hand, and that of respecting the rights of individuals, on the other.

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 53

judges in criminal trials. As regards the instruments available to prosecution 
services, thoughts about their advantages and disadvantages have already 
been expressed. Let us now study the tools specific to criminal trials. 

133. First of all, it is important to rule out arguments based solely on the effi-
ciency or inefficiency of these tools. The examples given above show that there 
can be tremendous opportunities but also real risks in the application of new 
technologies  that  are  used  without  the  necessary  precautions.  Public  deci-
sion-makers and judicial stakeholders must be particularly vigilant and play an 
active role in the development of these technologies; continuous monitoring 
is necessary to determine their real effectiveness and efficiency, and to avoid 
unforeseen consequences. This is even more important in criminal proceed-
ings because of their direct impact on the individuals’ personal freedoms.77

134. This implies that both the benefits and the drawbacks of the applica-
tion of such tools in the judicial field should be carefully measured. 

135. Supporters  often  argue  that  they  are  neutral  and  that  they  rely  on 
factual  and  objective  methods  that  help  to  make  justice  more  accurate 
and transparent. Another great asset, it is claimed, is their efficiency, which 
sometimes exceeds human capacities and can only be extremely valuable in 
a general context of reduced public funds or even a shortage of resources.

136. The inclusion of algorithmic variables such as criminal history and fam-
ily background means that the past behaviour of a certain group may decide 
the  fate  of  an  individual,  who  is,  of  course,  a  unique  human  being  with  a 
specific social background, education, skills, degree of guilt and distinctive 
motivations for committing a crime78. They also argue that human decisions 
can be based on values and considerations (e.g. societal) that would not be 
retained by the machine. For example, a judge could decide to order the bail 
of a female offender who has a risk of recidivism, on the basis of a hierarchy 
of values, for example by setting greater store by her role as a mother and 
protector of her children, whereas the algorithm would be able to determine 
the  risk  of  reoffending  more  accurately  but  would  not  be  able  to  operate 
such a hierarchy of priorities.

77. An extract from the Wisconsin Supreme Court decision in Wisconsin v. Loomis can also 
provide inspiration at European level: “It is important to consider that tools such as COMPAS 
continue to change and evolve. The concerns we address today may very well be allevi-
ated in the future. It is incumbent upon the criminal justice system to recognize that in 
the coming months and years, additional research data will become available. Different 
and better tools may be developed. As data changes, our use of evidence-based tools will 
have to change as well. The justice system must keep up with the research and continually 
assess the use of these tools.”

78. Aleš Zavrsnik, “Big Data, crime and social control”, page 196.

Page 54 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

137.
In criminal matters, there are also potential risks of discrimination when 
one  considers  that  these  tools,  which  are  constructed  and  interpreted  by 
humans, can reproduce unjustified and already existing inequalities in the 
criminal justice system concerned; instead of correcting certain problematic 
policies, technology may end up legitimising them. As already mentioned, 
the NGO ProPublica79 clearly revealed the discriminatory effects of the algo-
rithm used in COMPAS,80 which predicted that black populations were twice 
as  likely  to  reoffend  as  white  populations  within  two  years  of  sentencing 
while considering that white populations were much less likely to repeat the 
offence. They could, however, help reveal the errors in decision-making so 
that they may be corrected.81 Moreover, the lack of transparency in algorithm 
construction processes by proprietary companies and their accountability to 
the public is a cause for concern, all the more so if they are part of steps taken 
by state authorities to make data available to the public. 

138.
In the light of the foregoing, when algorithms are used in the context of 
a criminal trial it seems essential to fully guarantee respect for the principle of 
equality of arms and presumption of innocence established by Article 6 of the 
ECHR. The party concerned should have access to and be able to challenge 
the scientific validity of an algorithm, the weighting given to its various ele-
ments and any erroneous conclusions it comes to whenever a judge suggests 
that he/she might use it before making his/her decision. Moreover, this right 
of access is also covered by the fundamental principle of personal data pro-
tection. All people have the right not to be subject to decisions affecting them 
significantly made solely on the basis of automated data processing, without 
their point of view having been taken into account beforehand.

139.
In  this  respect,  there  is  a  difference  between  Europe  and  the  United 
States with regard to the right of access to algorithms: while in the United 
States the judicial authorities are still reluctant to recognise this right fully 
and weigh private interests (particularly the protection of intellectual prop-
erty) against the rights of defence, in Europe the framework is more protec-
tive  because  of  the  GDPR,  which  establishes  a  right  to  information  on  the 
underlying logic of decisions made using algorithms.82

79. www.propublica.org/article/technical-response-to-northpointe.
80. Other algorithms focus on other elements more directly related to the offence committed.
81. Mojca M. Plesnicar and Katja Sugman Stubbs, “Subjectivity, algorithms and the courtroom”.
82. Article15, 1. (h) of EU Regulation 2016/679: “The data subject shall have the right to 
obtain from the controller”... “the following information:”...” the existence of automated 
decision-making, including profiling, as referred to in Article 22, paragraphs 1 and 4, and, 
at least in those cases, meaningful information about the logic involved, as well as the 
significance and the envisaged consequences of such processing for the data subject”.

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 55

140. The considerations expressed earlier regarding the potentially negative 
effects of these tools on the impartiality of the judge are also valid in criminal 
matters: a judge who decides against the prediction of an algorithm is likely 
to take risks as he assumes greater responsibility. It does not seem unrealistic 
to imagine that judges would be reluctant to take on this additional burden, 
particularly  in  systems  where  their  terms  of  office  are  not  permanent  but 
subject to popular vote,83 or in which their personal liability (disciplinary, civil 
or even criminal) is likely to be incurred, especially if their statutory guaran-
tees in disciplinary matters are insufficient.

8. Specific questions relating to the 
protection of personal data

The use of algorithms raises the question of the protection of personal data when 
being  processed.  The  precautionary  principle  should  be  applied  to  risk  assess-
being  processed.  The  precautionary  principle  should  be  applied  to  risk  assess-
ment policies.
ment policies.

141. For  the  full  potential  of  algorithms  to  be  exploited  while  comply-
ing  with  data  protection  principles,  the  precautionary  principle  should  be 
applied and preventive policies should be put in place to counter the poten-
tial risks associated with the use of the data processed by these algorithms 
and the impact of their use on individuals and society in general.

142. The principle of lawfulness in the processing of personal data and the 
obligation to prevent or minimise the impact of data processing on the rights 
and fundamental freedoms of data subjects should induce prior risk assess-
ment. This should make it possible to implement the appropriate measures, 
particularly during the design stage (and hence by design) and by default, in 
order to mitigate the risks identified.

143. Since  personal  data  must  be  processed  for  specified  and  legitimate 
purposes, they must not be used in a way that is incompatible with those 
purposes and must not be further processed in a way that the data subject 
may  consider  unexpected,  inappropriate  or  questionable  (principle  of  loy-
alty). The  issue  of  re-using  personal  data,  making  them  widely  accessible, 
therefore needs to be handled with the utmost caution.

144. The design of the data processing methods used by algorithms should 
minimise the presence of redundant or marginal data and avoid any potential 

83.  Mojca M. Plesnicar and Katja Sugman Stubbs, “Subjectivity, algorithms and the courtroom”.

Page 56 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

hidden bias and any risk of discrimination or negative impact on the funda-
mental rights and freedoms of the data subjects.

145. When  artificial  intelligence  is  used,  the  rights  of  data  subjects  are  of 
especial importance, and the control that each of us must have over our per-
sonal information implies that it must be possible to exercise the following 
rights: the right of data subjects not to be subject to automated decisions 
significantly  affecting  them  without  their  point  of  view  being  taken  into 
account, the right to obtain information about the reasoning underlying the 
data processing carried out by algorithms, the right to oppose such process-
ing and the right to a legal remedy.

9. The potential and limitations of predictive justice tools

The term predictive justice should be dismissed because it is ambiguous and mis-
leading. These tools are based on methods of analysis of case-law, using statistical 
leading. These tools are based on methods of analysis of case-law, using statistical 
methods that do not in any way reproduce legal reasoning but may attempt to 
methods that do not in any way reproduce legal reasoning but may attempt to 
describe it. Analytical biases, if they cannot be totally eliminated, must be iden-
describe it. Analytical biases, if they cannot be totally eliminated, must be iden-
tified. The design process and the use of the tool must be embedded in a clear 
tified. The design process and the use of the tool must be embedded in a clear 
ethical framework.
ethical framework.

146.
In section 3, we already highlighted the ambiguity and fallacy of the 
concept of predictive justice and how it operates a slow shift in the collec-
tive mind, leading us to believe that machines, devoid of any emotion, will 
one day be better able to make the act of judging more reliable. More than 
ever, its promises need to be examined in an objective and scientific man-
ner, based on solid foundations of fundamental research, in order to identify 
possible limitations. In this connection, it should be noted that the risks of 
distorted  interpretations  of  the  meaning  of  court  decisions  are  extremely 
high  when  based  on  statistical  modelling  alone. This  observation  is  borne 
out  further  by  the  lack  of  precise  understanding  of  the  links  between  the 
data and the obvious presence of false correlations that cannot be discerned 
in large masses of data.

147. Moreover, the neutrality of algorithms is a myth, as their creators con-
sciously or unintentionally transfer their own value systems into them. The 
philosopher,  Eric  Sadin,  noted  that,  behind  their  efficient  and  impersonal 
facade,  algorithmic  systems  imperceptibly  reflect  the  intentions  of  their 
designers or sponsors, inducing a functioning and asymmetric power over 
the lives of other people. Similarly, researcher Aurélien Grosdidier considers 
that an algorithm, in itself, is capable of nothing other than allowing us – at 
best – to grasp part of the designer’s intention and extends the questioning 

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 57

to the entire information processing chain (designer’s intention, production 
of  computer  code,  execution  of  computer  code  and  context  of  execution 
then maintenance). This observation is also shared by the criminologist Aleš 
Zavrsnik, who underlines how the stages of construction and interpretation 
of algorithms are carried out by man, for man, and cannot escape errors, prej-
udices,  values,  human  interests  and  a  human  representation  of  the  world, 
however they are conceived.

148. Despite these significant limitations, should we overlook the contribu-
tion of a technology with unequalled power? Mathematicians C. S. Calude 
and G. Longo themselves stress in their study on big data that the restrictive 
or negative scope of their results, as often happens, does not destroy the sci-
ence of data but paves the way for greater thought, including the challenge 
of  a  new,  more  extensive  scientific  method  capable  of  incorporating  both 
new algorithmic instruments and classical tools by accompanying process-
ing with a rigorous evaluation of evidence. As highlighted in the introduc-
tion, the use of AI is likely to offer extremely significant support for profes-
sionals, including judges and lawyers, but also the general public, especially 
if one day they make it possible to construct unparalleled research and docu-
mentary analytical tools in legislative, regulatory, jurisprudential and doctri-
nal matters and create dynamic links between all these sources. But this type 
of application goes beyond the scope of this article since it is not designed 
to predict the outcome of a dispute but to analyse case-law in a given time 
and space.

149. As discussed in section 6, subject to the representativeness of selected 
and processed samples, AI has helped to devise much more precise scales 
of the average or median amounts of money allocated, mutatis mutandis, in 
various fields (financial support, compensatory benefits, compensation for 
bodily injury, severance pay, etc.). These scales, which are based more on a 
consensus than on an average analysis of what already exists, already provide 
significant support for decision-making and guidance without being able to 
replace  the  law  itself.  As  mentioned  earlier,  the  risk  is  that,  in  the  absence 
of a statistical representation of reality or of being able to predict anything, 
the results of predictive justice software will be set as standards without any 
validation by the legal system and in conflict with it.

150. Lastly, let us consider the idea of being able to step back at will from 
predictive  systems.  Rather  than  locking  users  into  a  probability  (or  set  of 
probabilities), the idea would be to allow them to navigate through the cor-
relations  that  led  the  system  to  propose  its  assessment  and  to  be  able  to 
distance themselves by selecting other more relevant concepts or groups of 
words or to exclude false correlations. To use the UCL example, this would 

Page 58 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

consist of proposing a graphic representation of the different terms retained 
by the system (with their respective weightings) to find that there has been 
a  violation  (or  non-violation)  and  to  authorise  other  paths  to  be  taken  by 
proposing the selection of other terms or lexical groups.

151. However bold and seductive this proposal may be, it presupposes that 
the professionals themselves (judges, lawyers, universities) take it over col-
lectively  to  test  its  feasibility  and  that  they  do  not  allow  private  operators 
alone, save for a few unchecked scientists, to design software and abstruse 
or locked modes of reasoning or calculation. 

152. The ambitious (and unfulfilled) promises of some legal tech companies 
must not hide the immense potential of technologies and the need for appli-
cations adapted and built in directly with scientific and academic research 
environments,  as  well  as  with  all  legal  professionals,  such  as  magistrates, 
clerks,  lawyers,  notaries,  bailiffs  and  field  experts.  A  number  of  measures 
would appear to be able to take full advantage of these new tools through 
applications adapted and devised in direct association with research work-
ers and all legal professionals, including judges, prosecutors, clerks, lawyers, 
notaries, bailiffs and experts in the field. 

153.
In  this  dynamic  context,  it  seems  essential,  firstly,  not  to  make  hasty 
decisions and to take time to debate in advance the risks and practical appli-
cations of these instruments for judicial systems, and to test them in the first 
stage. A judicial system in keeping with its time would be one that is capa-
ble of establishing, administering and guaranteeing genuine cyberethics for 
both the public and private sectors, and insisting on total transparency and 
fairness in the functioning of algorithms, which may contribute one day to 
judicial decision-making.

10. The need for an in-depth public debate on these tools 
prior to the implementation of public policies for their 
development. The urgent need for cyberethics to provide 
a framework for the development of artificial intelligence 
algorithms while respecting fundamental rights

The  challenge  of  integrating  these  tools  into  a  judicial  decision-making  pro-
cess  justifies  simplifying  the  concepts  for  the  target  group  concerned.  An  ethi-
cess  justifies  simplifying  the  concepts  for  the  target  group  concerned.  An  ethi-
cal framework must be set up to promote the rapid development of a form of AI 
cal framework must be set up to promote the rapid development of a form of AI 
that includes mechanisms preventing bias and discrimination in its very design 
that includes mechanisms preventing bias and discrimination in its very design 
processes.
processes.

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 59

10.1.The importance of debating, testing and continually 
reviewing the application of these tools prior to the 
implementation of public policies

154. The  issues  connected  with  the  implementation  of  predictive  jus-
tice  tools  are  so  numerous  and  multifaceted  that  they  call  for  a  balanced 
approach by public decision-makers.

155. Firstly, it is essential to hold a public debate around these questions, 
bringing  together  both  the  designers  of  the  tools  and  legal  professionals. 
Judicial  councils,  professional  associations  of  judges  and  bar  associations 
can undoubtedly contribute to this and help to identify opportunities and 
more controversial aspects. In addition, judicial training and law schools can 
play  a  key  role  in  raising  awareness  among  justice  professionals  on  these 
issues, so that they can better understand and practically contribute to cur-
rent developments.

156.
It is also essential to carry out research on the proposed applications 
and test them, both to understand their potential and their weaknesses and 
to be able to develop them further and adapt them to our needs. A right to 
examine the components and characteristics of the instruments proposed 
by the private sector (or those developed by independent and specialised 
public  institutes,  a  solution  which  should  be  encouraged)  seems  equally 
important so that the justice service can effectively carry out its mission. A 
rigorous evaluation of test results should be conducted before wider deploy-
ment and integration into public policy. It also seems strongly advisable to 
regularly assess the impact of these tools on the work of justice professionals.

10.2. The establishment of an ethical framework

157. First  of  all,  merely  adopting  a  legislative  or  regulatory  framework  for 
AI  seems  vain  in  a  digital  context,  which  is  inherently  transnational  in  its 
scope.  On  the  other  hand,  scrupulous  attention  to  the  nature  and  quality 
of open data is likely to minimise the risks of inadequate cross-referencing 
and to reinforce the relevance of the results of automated processing. With 
regard to the names of professionals, a simple precaution would be to pro-
hibit their public dissemination in structured raw databases given the risks 
of misuse. It would not be a question of limiting access to the information 
already processed (for example, the composition of a panel of judges) but of 
filtering the raw data made freely available. In short, a distinction needs to be 
made between access to information and access to databases, which can be 
manipulated at will.

Page 60 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

158. Researchers  Buttarelli  and  Marr  stressed  how  big  data  need  to  be 
closely controlled and protected. Other researchers (Pasquale and Morozov) 
have stressed the need to establish transparent procedures for the deploy-
ment of big data and more generally AI in the judicial field, because the solu-
tions proposed can never represent life in its complexity.

159. The  development  of  cyberethics  rules  to  guide  the  activity  of  stake-
holders  in  the  sector  and  to  promote  the  above-mentioned  principles  of 
transparency,  fairness  and  neutrality  of  the  tool  is  essential.  Regular  mon-
itoring  by  independent  experts  should  ensure  that  the  drivers  of  artificial 
intelligence used to assist judges in their decisions are not biased. It is not 
inappropriate  to  anticipate  the  implementation,  discreet  or  not,  of  paid 
referencing systems (based on Google’s Search Engine Advertising model) 
allowing certain operators to give less weight to decisions that are unfavour-
able to them. These rules will play a key role in increasing citizens’ confidence 
in their judicial systems.

160.
In this connection, the quality of the best systems could be recognised 
by  the  award  of  a  label  or  certification.  In  particular,  they  must  guarantee 
total transparency and perfect fairness in the way information is processed, 
both  for  professionals  and  for  citizens,  to  prevent  the  repetition  of  errors 
such as the aforementioned COMPAS algorithm. Justice professionals must 
be closely involved to be able to properly assess the risks and the impact of 
these applications on judicial systems.

161. Nowadays, all the experts involved in the development of AI, includ-
ing researchers, engineers and computer developers, have quite exceptional 
and unprecedented responsibilities. Their work could be accompanied by an 
even greater strengthening of the humanities. The example of some innova-
tive schools of computer developers shows that behind the will to “hack the 
system” hides, according to some observers, in reality a pragmatism devoid of 
any contextualisation of the responsibility that now hangs over technicians 
with quasi-demiurge powers. The Hippocratic Oath certainly has its limits in 
medicine but ritualises responsibility and provides an ethical framework.

162. Finally,  cyberethics  must  be  accompanied  by  large-scale  training  of 
stakeholders,  from  algorithm  designers  and  legal  tech  companies  to  their 
users. New transdisciplinary humanities should be made available to all so 
that AI becomes a vector of positive development for humankind. 

Appendix I – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 61

Appendix II
Which uses of AI in European 
judicial systems?

This Annex to the Charter reviews different uses of AI in European systems and 
encourages to a different degree their application in the light of the principles and 
encourages to a different degree their application in the light of the principles and 
values set out in the Ethical Charter.
values set out in the Ethical Charter.

The use of machine learning to constitute search engines for case-law enhance-
The use of machine learning to constitute search engines for case-law enhance-
ment is an opportunity to be taken up for all legal professionals. Additional appli-
ment is an opportunity to be taken up for all legal professionals. Additional appli-
cations (drawing up of scales, support for alternative dispute settlement measures, 
cations (drawing up of scales, support for alternative dispute settlement measures, 
etc.) should be considered, but due care must be taken (in particular, the quality of 
etc.) should be considered, but due care must be taken (in particular, the quality of 
the data source and not mass processing of the entire dispute in question). Other 
the data source and not mass processing of the entire dispute in question). Other 
applications (“predictive justice”) should be assigned to the field of research and 
applications (“predictive justice”) should be assigned to the field of research and 
further development (in consultation with legal professionals in order to ensure 
further development (in consultation with legal professionals in order to ensure 
that they fully tie in with actual needs) before contemplating use on a significant 
that they fully tie in with actual needs) before contemplating use on a significant 
scale in the public sphere.
scale in the public sphere.

In criminal matters, this is a very sensitive issue but it should not be ignored. In the 
In criminal matters, this is a very sensitive issue but it should not be ignored. In the 
light of the many existing questions as to their compatibility with a certain num-
light of the many existing questions as to their compatibility with a certain num-
ber of fundamental rights, the use of algorithms to calculate the potential risks of 
ber of fundamental rights, the use of algorithms to calculate the potential risks of 
recidivism of an individual brought to justice should be considered with the most 
recidivism of an individual brought to justice should be considered with the most 
extreme  reservations.  On  the  other  hand,  the  processing  of  global  quantitative 
extreme  reservations.  On  the  other  hand,  the  processing  of  global  quantitative 
data for crime prevention is an avenue to be further explored with these new tech-
data for crime prevention is an avenue to be further explored with these new tech-
niques, taking into consideration known biases (performative effects, data quality, 
niques, taking into consideration known biases (performative effects, data quality, 
etc.).  Similarly,  the  use  of  algorithms  to  form  a  better  link  between  the  type  of 
etc.).  Similarly,  the  use  of  algorithms  to  form  a  better  link  between  the  type  of 
community service available and an individual’s personality may be a factor in the 
community service available and an individual’s personality may be a factor in the 
effectiveness of a measure of this kind.
effectiveness of a measure of this kind.

► Page 63

Uses to be encouraged

► Case-law enhancement: machine Learning techniques have been 
increasingly deployed in the field of natural language processing in 
the past years (this includes initial efforts in natural language under-
standing) and are a considerable asset for finding search options to 
complement current keyword or full-text search. These tools could 
link various sources (e.g. constitutions and conventions, laws, case 
law and legal theory). Data visualisation techniques could illustrate 
search results.

► Access to law: without replacing human intervention, chatbots could 
be set up to facilitate access to the various existing sources of informa-
tion using natural language. Document templates (court applications, 
lease agreements, etc.) could also be generated online.

► Creation of new strategic tools: the use of data science and artificial 
intelligence techniques on court activity data can help improve the 
efficiency of justice by making it possible, for example, to carry out 
quantitative and qualitative evaluations and to make projections (e.g. 
future human and budgetary resources). Key performance indicators 
could be drawn up on this basis. It is recommended that legal profes-
sionals, especially judges, be involved in the implementation of these 
tools, in terms of taking ownership of these tools and of analysing the 
results in conjunction with factors relating to the specific features of 
the court in question or the quality of justice (for example, the need 
to preserve access to justice).

Possible uses, requiring considerable 
methodological precautions

► Help in the drawing up of scales in certain civil disputes: an analysis 
of all judicial decisions is not statistically meaningful if all the causative 
factors (explicit and implicit in the decisions) are not identified. Knowing 
that the average compensation awarded in a certain geographical area 
is higher than in another can be explained not due to the behaviour 
of judges, but in the light of the characteristics of the area in question. 
Machine learning can therefore be useful in identifying decisions 
(see Case-law enhancement above), but the automated processing 
of data alone cannot produce meaningful information. An essential 
prerequisite is the compilation of a relevant sample of decisions to 
be processed (for example, via surveys).

Page 64 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

► Support for alternative dispute settlement measures in civil matters: 
in some European countries, “predictive justice” tools are used by 
insurance companies to evaluate the chances of success of a dispute 
and to steer the litigant towards another method of dispute resolu-
tion when it is felt that there is little chance of success. Furthermore, 
some systems abroad offer compensation amounts without any real 
transparency as to the rules of calculation. However, these systems 
cannot be considered as impartial and reliable (see the section on 
machine learning techniques). Decisions are made about a citizen 
using truncated bases. In other cases, a litigant may be advised, by 
means of a virtual agent (chatbot), to opt for an alternative dispute 
settlement measure after a preliminary examination of the criteria 
entered by the litigant himself or herself, when visiting a court’s 
website or searching legal information online. The virtual agent may, 
where appropriate, also recommend that the litigant seek advice from 
a mediation service or a lawyer. In all these cases, the presence of a 
trained third party (mediator using not only techniques but maybe 
scales as calculated above, or a lawyer) would appear to be the most 
appropriate solution at this stage.

► Online dispute resolution: when litigants go onto an online dispute 
resolution platform, they should be informed in a clear and compre-
hensible manner whether the processing of their dispute is done in 
an entirely automated way or with the involvement of a mediator 
or arbitrator. In addition, the information given to litigants must be 
honest and must avoid giving them the impression that a court is 
involved (in this connection, the term “online court” is often used for 
this type of platform, whereas technically their purpose is to provide 
alternative dispute resolution services). These are two essential factors 
in enabling litigants to make an informed choice, possibly disagreeing 
with the advice and deciding to go to a real court within the meaning 
of Article 6 of the ECHR. Furthermore, in view of the requirements of 
Articles 6 and 13 of the ECHR, forms of review of the online dispute 
resolution procedure and its outcome by state courts should always 
be considered, especially where the litigant has consented to fully 
automated online dispute resolution.

► The use of algorithms in criminal investigation in order to identify 
where criminal offences are being committed: this type of application 
could concern not only the police but also prosecutors in the crime 
prevention bodies of which they are a part. Systems have been used in 
the United States to guide police patrols in real time towards possible 
locations where offences are being committed. However, this type of 

Appendix II – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 65

quantitative approach can generate a strong “performative effect” (in a 
given location, there is a greater chance of discovering an offence and 
this then reinforces the system). Criminal analysis through approaches 
combining geographic information systems (GISs) and large amounts 
of data on procedures could be better shared with prosecutors and 
could certainly benefit from a significant machine learning contribu-
tion. Anti-money laundering units already use “predictive” systems 
to identify suspicious financial flows, but in the case of quantitative 
(financial) information, machines are more able to produce reliable 
results. Researchers should also have better access to these data to 
produce relevant studies for policy-makers.

Uses to be considered following 
additional scientific studies

► Judge profiling: quantifying a judge’s activity will reveal less about any 
possible biases than about any external factors influencing his or her 
decisions. The judge himself or herself is not the reason why judicial 
activity in an impoverished area does not produce the same results as 
in another territory, whatever his personality may be. When the deci-
sion is rendered in a collegial manner and without the possibility for a 
judge to express a divergent opinion, it is pointless to profile each of 
the judges of the chamber. On the other hand, offering judges a more 
detailed quantitative and qualitative assessment of their activities, 
thanks to new tools, but with a purely informative aim of assisting in 
decision-making and for their exclusive use, could be encouraged.
► Anticipating court decisions: statistical processing of lexical groups 
alone reveals the frequency of the use of certain groups of words but 
does not identify the real reasons for a decision and does not carry 
out a legal analysis (see the study carried out on ECHR decisions by 
the University College of London which produced better results on 
the facts than on the analysis of the law). Hybrid systems, founded 
on the construction of mathematical models that are supposed to 
represent the diverse range of judges’ reasoning, are not any more 
efficient because they are still limited by bias in the data sample that 
they have processed and have to start again from square one if a law 
is amended or if there is a reversal in case law.

Uses to be considered with the most extreme reservations

► Use of algorithms in criminal matters in order to profile individ-
uals: experiments in other countries (COMPAS in the United States 

Page 66 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

and HART in the United Kingdom) have been criticised by NGOs (see 
work by ProPublica in the United States and Big Brother Watch in the 
UK). Because of the limitations of the methodology used, this pure 
statistical approach has led to wrong result: the finding that some 
African-American individuals are more often involved in criminal acts 
has led to a higher risk factor for the entire African-American popu-
lation. Thus, even for minor offences, these systems have negatively 
weighted African-American defendants, with the result of unfairly 
increasing the quantum of their sentences. This approach, which has 
discriminatory and deterministic effects, must be replaced by one that 
is more respectful of European standards concerning criminal sanctions 
and which must offer the individual the possibility of rehabilitation 
and reintegration. If algorithmic systems manage to help improve the 
collation of information for probation services, for example, and make 
it possible for the relevant information to be collected more quickly 
for subsequent human processing, then progress would definitely 
be made (particularly in expedited proceedings). Any other use is 
prone to biases which will come into conflict with certain national 
and supra-national fundamental principles.

► Quantity-based norm: it is not only a question of producing scales, 
which could be legitimate, but of providing each judge with the con-
tent of the decisions produced by all the other judges and claiming 
to lock his future choice into the mass of these “precedents”. This 
approach should be rejected because this large number cannot add 
to or act in place of the law. For the reasons provided above (Help in 
the drawing up of scales), a quantity-based approach is not the way to 
go. The CEPEJ study also highlighted the dangers of the crystallisation 
of case law and the potentially negative effects on the impartiality 
and independence of judges.

Appendix II – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 67

Appendix III
Glossary

This glossary provides a definition of the terms used by the Ethical Charter and 
study document. Preference has been given to providing a narrow definition for 
study document. Preference has been given to providing a narrow definition for 
all the vocabulary used. All the documents must be read and understood in the 
all the vocabulary used. All the documents must be read and understood in the 
light of these definitions.
light of these definitions.

A

ALGORITHM Finite sequence of formal rules (logical operations and instruc-
tions) making it possible to obtain a result from the initial input of informa-
tion.  This  sequence  may  be  part  of  an  automated  execution  process  and 
draw on models designed through machine learning.

ANONYMISATION Method to process personal data in order to completely 
and irreversibly prevent the identification of a natural or legal person. Anony-
misation therefore implies that there is no longer any possible link between 
the information concerned and the person to whom it relates. Identification 
then  becomes  completely  impossible.84  As  the  principles  relating  to  data 
protection  apply  to  all  information  relating  to  an  identified  or  identifiable 
individual, they do not apply to anonymised data. 

ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  (AI)  A  set  of  scientific  methods,  theories  and 
techniques whose aim is to reproduce, by a machine, the cognitive abilities 
of  human  beings.  Current  developments  seek  to  have  machines  perform 
complex tasks previously carried out by humans.

84. Working Party on Article 29 Opinion 05/2014 on Anonymisation Techniques. See also 
No. 26 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
27 April 2016.

► Page 69

However, the term artificial intelligence is criticised by experts who distin-
guish between “strong” AIs (yet able to contextualise specialised and varied 
problems  in  a  completely  autonomous  manner)  and “weak”  or “moderate” 
AIs  (high  performance  in  their  field  of  training).  Some  experts  argue  that 
“strong” AIs would require significant advances in basic research, and not just 
simple improvements in the performance of existing systems, to be able to 
model the world as a whole. 

The tools identified in this document are developed using machine learning 
methods, i. e. “weak” AIs.

B

BIG DATA (metadata, large data sets) The term big data refers to large sets 
of data from mixed sources (e.g. open data, proprietary data and commer-
cially purchased data). For data derived from judicial activity, big data could 
be the combination of statistical data, records of business software connec-
tions (application logs), court decisions’ databases, etc.

C

CHATBOT  (conversational  agent)  Conversational  agent  which  converses 
with its user (for example, empathy robots used to help those who are ill, or 
automated conversation services in customer relations).85

D

DATA  Representation  of  information  for  automatic  processing.  When  it  is 
said that algorithms can be “applied” to the most diverse realities in the legal 
world or elsewhere, one presupposes the “digitalizability” of any reality in the 
form of “data”. But it is clear from physics that nothing tells us that physical 
processes  can  be  adequately  translated  in  terms  of “data”  (and  integrated 
into the input/output cycle of algorithms). If this is already the case in phys-
ics, there is no reason why this should not also be the case in social relations. 
We must therefore be cautious with the idea of “data”, which always assumes 
that the reality we are trying to describe has a format such that it is naturally 
algorithmically processable.

85. CNIL Report December 2017: How can humans keep the upper hand? The ethical matters 

raised by algorithms and artificial intelligence.

Page 70 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

DATABASE  A  database  is  a “container”  that  stores  data  such  as  numbers, 
dates  or  words,  which  can  be  reprocessed  using  a  computer  to  produce 
information, for example, gathering and sorting numbers and names to form 
a directory.

DATA MINING Data mining makes it possible to analyse a large volume of 
data and highlight models, correlations and trends.

DATA  SCIENCE  A  large  field  that  groups  together  mathematics,  statistics, 
probabilities, data processing and data visualisation in order to gain under-
standing from a mixed set of data (images, sound, text, genome data, links 
between social networks, physical measurements, etc.). 

Methods and tools derived from artificial intelligence fall within this category.

DEEP LEARNING See Machine Learning and Neurons

E

EXPERT SYSTEM This is one of the ways to achieve artificial intelligence. An 
expert  system  is  a  tool  capable  of  reproducing  the  cognitive  mechanisms 
of  an  expert  in  a  particular  field.  More  precisely,  it  is  software  capable  of 
answering questions, by reasoning based on known facts and rules. It con-
sists of 3 parts: 

► a fact base;

► a rule base;

► an inference engine.

The inference engine is able to use facts and rules to produce new facts, until 
it reaches the answer to the expert question asked. 

Most existing expert systems are based on formal logic mechanisms (Aristo-
telian logic) and use deductive reasoning.

L

LEGAL TECH Companies using information technology in the field of law in 
order to offer innovative legal services. These companies are start-ups spe-
cialised in law. Other terms derived from business sectors have also appeared 
such as Fintechs for start-ups offering financial services and Medtechs in the 
medical field.

Appendix III – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 71

M

MACHINE  LEARNING  Machine  learning  makes  it  possible  to  construct  a 
mathematical  model  from  data,  incorporating  a  large  number  of  variables 
that  are  not  known  in  advance.  The  parameters  are  configured  gradually 
during the learning phase, which uses training data sets to find and classify 
links. The different methods of machine learning are chosen by the design-
ers depending on the nature of the tasks to be completed (grouping). These 
methods  are  usually  classified  into  three  categories:  (human)  supervised 
learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning. These three cat-
egories group together different methods including neural networks, deep 
learning, etc.

The graph below illustrates the different categories of machine learning:

Meaningful
Compression

Structure
Discovery

image
Classification

Customer
Retention

Big Data
Visualisation  

Dimensionality
reduction

Feature
Elicitation

Idenity Fraud
Detection

Classification

Diagnostics 

Advertising 
Popularity 
Prediction

Regression 

Weather
Forecasting

Market
Forecasting

Estimating
life expectancy

Recommender
Systems

Targetted
Marketing

Unsupervised 
Learning

Supervised
Learning 

Clustering

Customer
Segmentation

Real-time decisions

Machine 
Learning

Population
Growth
Prediction

Game AI

Reinforcement
Learning

Robot
Navigation

Skill Acquisition

Learning
Tasks

Page 72 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

METADATA Data that make it possible to define, contextualise or describe 
other data. In most of its computer uses, the meta prefix means “reference 
definition or description”.

Metadata synthesize basic information about data, they facilitate the search 
and  manipulation  of  particular  data  instances.  The  author,  creation  date, 
modification date and file size are examples. Metadata and its corollary, data 
filtering, help to locate a specific document.

N

NEURONS/NEURAL  NETWORK  Neural  networks  are  computing  systems 
vaguely  inspired  by  the  biological  neural  networks  that  constitute  animal 
brains.[1]  Such  systems “learn”  to  perform  tasks  by  considering  examples, 
generally without being programmed with any task-specific rules. For exam-
ple, in image recognition, they might learn to identify images that contain 
cats by analyzing example images that have been manually labeled as “cat” 
or “no  cat”  and  using  the  results  to  identify  cats  in  other  images. They  do 
this without any prior knowledge about cats, e.g., that they have fur, tails, 
whiskers and cat-like faces. Instead, they automatically generate identifying 
characteristics from the learning material that they process. 

An ANN is based on a collection of connected units or nodes called artificial 
neurons  which  loosely  model  the  neurons  in  a  biological  brain.  Each  con-
nection,  like  the  synapses  in  a  biological  brain,  can  transmit  a  signal  from 
one artificial neuron to another. An artificial neuron that receives a signal can 
process it and then signal additional artificial neurons connected to it. 

The original goal of the ANN approach was to solve problems in the same 
way that a human brain would. However, over time, attention moved to per-
forming  specific  tasks,  leading  to  deviations  from  biology.  Artificial  neural 
networks have been used on a variety of tasks, including computer vision, 
speech  recognition,  machine  translation,  social  network  filtering,  playing 
board and video games and medical diagnosis.

O

OPEN  DATA The  term  refers  to  making  structured  databases  available  for 
public  download. These  data  can  be  inexpensively  re-used  subject  to  the 
terms of a specific licence, which can, in particular, stipulate or prohibit cer-
tain purposes of re-use.

Appendix III – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 73

Open data should not be confused with unitary public information available 
on websites, where the entire database cannot be downloaded (for exam-
ple,  a  database  of  court  decisions).  Open  data  do  not  replace  the  manda-
tory publication of specific administrative or judicial decisions or measures 
already laid down by certain laws or regulations.

Lastly, there is sometimes confusion between data (strictly speaking open 
data) and their processing methods (machine learning, data science) for dif-
ferent purposes (search engines, assistance in drafting documents, analysis 
of trends of decisions, predicting court decisions, etc.).

OPEN  SOURCE  SOFTWARE  Software  for  which  the  source  code  is  avail-
able to everyone. The software can therefore be freely used, modified and 
redistributed.

P

PERSONAL DATA Any information concerning an identified or identifiable 
natural person (the “person concerned”), directly or indirectly.

These include sensitive data relating to genetic data, biometric data uniquely 
identifying an individual, data relating to offences, criminal proceedings and 
convictions and related security measures, and any data for information they 
reveal on racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, trade union membership, 
religious or other beliefs, health or sex life.

PREDICTIVE JUSTICE Predictive justice is the analysis of large amounts of 
judicial decisions by artificial intelligence technologies in order to make pre-
dictions for the outcome of certain types of specialised disputes (for exam-
ple, redundancy payments or alimentary pensions).

The term “predictive” used by legal tech companies comes from the branches 
of science (principally statistics) that make it possible to predict future results 
through inductive analysis. Judicial decisions are processed with a view to 
detecting correlations between input data (criteria set out in legislation, the 
facts of the case and the reasoning) and output data (formal judgment such 
as the compensation amount). 

Correlations deemed to be relevant make it possible to create models which, 
when  used  with  new  input  data  (new  facts  or  precisions  described  as  a 
parameter,  such  as  the  duration  of  the  contractual  relationship),  produce 
according to their developers a prediction of the decision (for example, the 
compensation range).

Page 74 ► European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)

Some authors have criticised both the form and substance of this approach.
They  argue  that,  in  general,  the  mathematical  modelling  of  certain  social 
phenomena is not a task comparable to other more easily quantifiable activ-
ities (isolating the really causative factors of a court decision is infinitely more 
complex than playing the game of Go or recognising an image for example): 

here, there is a much higher risk of false correlations. In addition, in legal the-
ory, two contradictory decisions can prove to be valid if the legal reasoning 
is sound. Consequently, making predictions would be a purely informative 
exercise without any prescriptive claim.

PROFILING An automated data processing technique that consists of apply-
ing  a “profile”  to  a  natural  person,  in  particular  in  order  to  make  decisions 
about him or her or to analyze or predict personal preferences, behaviours 
and attitudes.

PROCESSING  OF  PERSONAL  DATA  According  to  Article  2  of  the  revised 
Convention 108, “data processing” means any operation or set of operations 
performed  on  personal  data,  such  as  the  collection,  storage,  preservation, 
alteration, retrieval, disclosure, making available, erasure, or destruction of, 
or the carrying out of logical and/or arithmetical operations on such data.

PSEUDONYMISATION Pursuant to Article 4 of the GDPR, this is the process-
ing of personal data in such a manner that they can no longer be attributed 
to a specific data subject without the use of additional information, provided 
that  such  additional  information  is  kept  separately  and  is  subject  to  tech-
nical and organisational measures to ensure that the personal data are not 
attributed to an identified or identifiable natural person.86

86. Article 4 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 

April 2016.

Appendix III – In-depth study on the use of AI in judicial systems ► Page 75

Appendix IV
Checklist for integrating 
the Charter’s principles into 
your processing method

In order to assess the compatibility of your processing method with the Char-
ter, there is a self-evaluation scale available for each of the principles listed.

For each principle, tick the box that corresponds to your processing methods.

The box furthest to the left indicates complete integration, the box furthest 
to the right indicates no integration.

At the bottom of the evaluation sheet (in the line marked “Total”), add up the 
number of boxes ticked. The column with the highest score indicates your 
processing method’s level of compatibility with the Charter.

This evaluation is of course purely informative and by no means equates to 
any certification.

grati

Principle  
integrated 

Principle  
not 
integrated 

Page 76 ►

Checklist for evaluating 
your processing methods

Principle of fundamental rights: 
Ensure that the design and implementation of artificial intelligence tools and 
services are compatible with fundamental rights, including the right to pro-
tection of personal data

Checklist for evaluating your processing methods 

Principle of non-discrimination: 
Specifically prevent the development or intensification of any discrimination 
between individuals or groups of individuals 

Checklist for evaluating your processing methods 

Principle of quality and security: 
With  regard  to  the  processing  of  judicial  decisions  and  data,  use  certified 
sources and intangible data with models elaborated in a secure technologi-
cal environment

Checklist for evaluating your processing methods 

Principle of transparency, impartiality and fairness: 
Make  data  processing  methods  accessible  and  understandable,  authorise 
external audits 

Checklist for evaluating your processing methods 

Principle “under user control”: Preclude a prescriptive approach and ensure 
that users are informed actors and in control of their choices

+

TOTAL  

-
-

Compatible with the 
Charter 

Measures to be taken to 
be compatible 

Not compatible with 
the Charter

► Page 77

The Charter provides a framework of principles that can guide policy 
makers, legislators and justice professionals when they grapple with 
the rapid development of Artificial Intelligence in national judicial 
processes.

The CEPEJ’s view is that the application of Artificial Intelligence in 
the  field  of  justice  can  contribute  to  improve  the  efficiency  and 
quality.  It  must  be  implemented  in  a  responsible  manner  which 
complies with the fundamental rights guaranteed in particular in the 
European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and the Council of 
Europe Convention on the Protection of Personal Data. It is essential 
to ensure that Artificial Intelligence remains a tool in the service of 
the general interest and that its use respects individual rights.

The Charter defines five core principles to be respected in the field 
of Artificial Intelligence and justice: respect of fundamental rights; 
non-discrimination; quality and security; transparency, impartiality 
and fairness;  “under user control”. The Charter is accompanied by a n 
in-depth study on the use of Artificial Intelligence in judicial systems.

www.coe.int/cepej

9
1
4
5
0
0
S
M
E
R
P

ENG

www.coe.int

The Council of Europe is the continent’s leading 
human rights organisation. It comprises 47 member 
states, including all members of the European 
Union. All Council of Europe member states have 
signed up to the European Convention on Human 
Rights, a treaty designed to protect human rights, 
democracy and the rule of law. The European Court 
of Human Rights oversees the implementation 
of the Convention in the member states.
