# Fuente
- archivo: A_user-centered_approach_to_developing_an_AI_system_analyzing_U.S._federal_court_data.pdf
- ruta: C:\Users\matia\desarrollo\judiciales2026ush\ingesta\trabajos\academicos\A_user-centered_approach_to_developing_an_AI_system_analyzing_U.S._federal_court_data.pdf
- extraido: 2026-04-24T11:33:49

# Contenido

Artificial Intelligence and Law (2023) 31:547–570
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-022-09320-z

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

A user‑centered approach to developing an AI system 
analyzing U.S. federal court data

Rachel F. Adler1,2 
Harper Pack1 · Sergio Servantez1 · Adam R. Pah1 · Kristian Hammond1 · 
SCALES OKN Consortium1

 · Andrew Paley1 · Andong L. Li Zhao1 · 

Accepted: 29 May 2022 / Published online: 1 August 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022

Abstract
We implemented a user-centered approach to the design of an artificial intelligence 
(AI) system that provides users with access to information about the workings of the 
United  States  federal  court  system  regardless  of  their  technical  background.  Pres-
ently, most of the records associated with the federal judiciary are provided through 
a federal system that does not support exploration aimed at discovering systematic 
patterns about court activities. In addition, many users lack the data analytical skills 
necessary to conduct their own analyses and convert data into information. We con-
ducted interviews, observations, and surveys to uncover the needs of our users and 
discuss  the  development  of  an  intuitive  platform  informed  from  these  needs  that 
makes it possible for legal scholars, lawyers, and journalists to discover answers to 
more advanced questions about the federal court system. We report on results from 
usability  testing  and  discuss  design  implications  for  AI  and  law  practitioners  and 
researchers.

Keywords  User-centered design · Notebook interface · Data analytics · Natural 
language processing · Visualization

1  Introduction

The judiciary carries the responsibility of interpreting laws and deciding our legal 
disputes, yet this system is far from transparent. In the United States, the federal 
court  system  handled  approximately  425,000  cases  in  2020  alone  (U.S.  Courts 
2020),  which  are  maintained  on  PACER  (Public  Access  to  Court  Electronic 

 *  Rachel F. Adler 
r-adler@neiu.edu

1  Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
2  Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, IL, USA

Vol.:(0123456789)1 3 
548 

R. F. Adler et al.

Records), and available online to the public for a fee. PACER, though, has a non-
intuitive user interface with differing standards for recording information across 
the 94 regional trial courts (Martin 2018; Alexander and Feizollahi 2020).

While many argue that there should be greater levels of government transpar-
ency, in practice data is often not well structured or easy to analyze (Weerakkody 
et  al.  2017).  Despite  the  need  to  conduct  large-scale  systematic  analyses  across 
multiple  legal  subject  areas,  legal  research  has  not  benefited  from  the  methodo-
logical advances in big data and analytics as much as in other fields (Howe et al. 
2008;  González‐Bailón  2013;  Khoury  and  Ioannidis  2014;  Carter  et  al.  2015; 
Obermeyer and Emanuel 2016).

Even  if  we  had  fully  available  and  standardized  data,  domain  experts,  such 
as  legal  scholars,  lawyers,  and  journalists,  rarely  have  the  technical  expertise  to 
conduct complex data analyses. There is a gap between open data and accessible 
information for all. Therefore, domain experts are either unable to answer more 
complicated questions or must carry the significant costs of hiring a data scientist 
to perform these tasks. There are many questions lawyers, legal scholars, or jour-
nalists  may  want  to  ask  of  the  data,  including  understanding  the  ruling  patterns 
of a particular judge or how general court trends have changed over time. While 
there are some systems out there, such as LexisNexis and Westlaw, which provide 
an easier to use interface with analytics capabilities, the cost of these systems are 
prohibitive to many users and are not intended to answer a broad range of ques-
tions of the data at a systemic level.

Furthermore,  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  solutions  in  law  have  gravitated 
towards  the  development  of  mostly  algorithmic  and  computational  solutions 
(Curtotti  et  al.  2015;  Zhong  et  al.  2020;  Di  Porto  2021),  with  an  emphasis  on 
search engine interfaces (Sekaran et al. 2020) and automating processes for peo-
ple  who  already  know  what  they  are  doing,  such  as  a  data  analyst  (Wang  et  al. 
2019). However, as we integrate AI into more human interactions, it is imperative 
to  develop  additional  aspects  of  intelligence  for  AI  systems  that  allows  them  to 
move from the automation of tasks for experts to the automation of expertise for 
non-technical users.

A  number  of  advances  across  statistical  and  symbolic  techniques  under  the  big 
tent of AI have opened up a variety of new types of system architectures and user 
experiences. By building AI systems that know how and when to do the appropri-
ate analyses to answer questions (e.g. determining the appropriate visualization and 
statistical techniques), we can democratize access to legal information to non-expert 
users. However, without including users in the process of AI systems, there is a risk 
to the user comprehension of that system (Holzinger 2013).

Therefore, we used a user-centered approach to inform the development of an AI 
system that provides information transparency in law. Rather than looking to auto-
mate processes for data analysts/technical experts, we look to automate the nature of 
their expertise (via an ontology-driven AI reasoning engine) and their interactions 
with  the  true  end-users  of  the  data  science  pipeline  (by  designing  the  AI  system 
based on user-centered practices). In this paper we report on the process of survey-
ing,  interviewing,  and  observing  legal  scholars,  lawyers,  and  journalists,  focusing 
on  their  needs  rather  than  solutions  (Patnaik  and  Becker  1999),  to  discover  what 

1 3549

Fig. 1   A conceptual map of the division of responsibilities between user and system in running analysis 
and generating results

questions potential users would like to ask an AI legal system and map those ques-
tions to information needs.

We then describe the design of a system that translates domain expert questions 
on federal court records and information needs to queries and analytics and commu-
nicates the results back to the users in a clear and concise method (Fig. 1) and report 
on  its  usability.  Given  a  simplified  ontology  of  domain  semantics  mapped  to  data 
as well as an analytics ontology, the legal AI system understands how to generate 
relevant analysis plans (including SQL queries) and their natural language represen-
tations such that novice users can interact with the system without assistance from 
technical  experts.  Our  ultimate  goal  is  to  put  the  burden  on  the  machine,  leaving 
users to simply assert “I’m interested in information about judges” and the system 
responds, “given the data I have on hand and what I know about judges, here’s what 
I can do for you.” Furthermore, as we design the system we are looking at scalability 
by  increasing  the  number  of  questions  that  users  can  receive  answers  to  (e.g.  out-
comes and motions) through classifying legal dockets using machine learning.

Our main research questions are as follows:
R1.  What  types  of  questions  would  non-technical  legal  scholars,  lawyers,  and 

journalists like to ask of the data?

R2. Can we design a system that permits non-technical legal experts to ask ques-
tions about the legal system that would normally require the skills of a data scientist 
to answer?

R3. How can we validate that our solution is working well?

1 3A user‑centered approach to developing an AI system analyzing…550 

R. F. Adler et al.

2   User‑centered design in AI and law

In  order  to  design  an  AI  system  that  efficiently  utilizes  federal  court  data  to 
answer questions using appropriate analytical techniques and communicates those 
answers  effectively,  we  wanted  to  understand  the  target  users  and  their  needs. 
Therefore, we incorporated user-centered design strategies.

User-centered design (Norman and Draper 1986) is the process of focusing on 
users and their needs throughout the stages of the design process. User-centered 
design  has  expanded  to  applications  in  numerous  areas,  such  as  health  (Harte 
et  al.  2017),  education  (Ebner  and  Holzinger  2007),  business  modeling  (Arar 
et  al.  2018),  and  journalism  (Aitamurto  et  al.  2019).  Studies  using  this  method 
have included feedback from users, designers, and even community leaders (Iaco-
belli et al. 2018). In the book Change by Design, Tim Brown from the firm IDEO 
describes  how  design  methods  can  be  expanded  to  numerous  areas  such  as  the 
organizations themselves, hospitals, and universities (Brown 2019).

Few studies focus on using user-centered design in the legal realm to make legal 
applications usable for users, such as legal scholars, journalists, and the public. Jack-
son  (2016)  proposes  that  law  schools  teach  human-centered  design  in  addition  to 
technology courses. This initiative is already happening in some universities (Hagan 
2020). Hagan (2014) mentions that design thinking is particularly suitable for legal 
practitioners due to the potential to better solve problems, manage information, and 
provide more positive experiences overall for both lawyers and clients.

Quintanilla (2017) proposes a human-centered civil justice design to discover 
how  people  respond  to  features  of  the  civil  justice  system.  There  is  a  push  for 
court  systems  to  have  ‘a  culture  of  usability  testing  and  feedback’  to  find  user 
frustrations  and  implement  improvements  (Hagan  2018).  User-centered,  or  cit-
izen-centered,  approaches  can  be  applied  to  better  include  users  in  the  develop-
ment  of  online  government  services  (Bertot  et  al.  2008).  This  can  be  done  by 
including users during multiple phases of the development cycle through surveys, 
interviews, and usability testing (Jaeger 2008; Verdegem and Verleye 2009).

Understanding who your user is can help create legal systems that are efficient for 
them.  For  example,  non-lawyers  report  having  twice  as  many  usability  difficulties 
than lawyers when completing information retrieval tasks on legal databases (New-
man and Doherty 2008). Non-lawyers have also reported wanting legal help sites to 
have  clarity,  open  access,  authority,  comprehensiveness,  modern  design,  and  con-
versation (Hagan 2016). In order to make contracts readable to non-lawyers, studies 
have found that including visualizations of text-based contracts can improve partici-
pants’ answering speed and accuracy (Passera 2012; Passera and Haapio 2013; Pas-
sera et al. 2017). People benefit from systems that automatically present data visu-
ally (Mackinlay et al. 2007; Wongsuphasawat et al. 2017), however, it is important 
to choose appropriate principles for selecting visual representations that support the 
data and analytical tasks (Cook and Thomas 2005). For example, line graphs are a 
common  method  for  depicting  trends  over  time  (Evergreen  2019).  As  more  legal 
data become available for the public, data analytics will continue to be a common 
technique for analyzing legal judgements and laws (Park et al. 2021). Therefore, it is 

1 3551

important to determine ideal methods to display this data and legal analytics back to 
the users in a way that they can easily understand (Lettieri et al. 2018).

There have been recent advances in AI interfaces for automated analyses and vis-
ualizations, partly drawing from work in visual analytics. Visual analytics is a deci-
sion making approach that integrates visualization, human factors and data analysis 
through identifying the best automated analysis, appropriate visualization, and inter-
action  techniques  (Keim  et  al.  2008).  Visual  analytics  can  benefit  from  the  inclu-
sion of more user-centered approaches and evaluation (Scholtz 2017). Additionally, 
there has been recent work in integrating natural language interfaces with automated 
visualizations.  For  instance,  one  approach  explores  how  understandable  visualiza-
tions can be automatically generated through natural language queries supplied by 
the user, where the complexities of the natural language processing techniques used 
to  parse  and  semantically  understand  the  query  are  abstracted  away  from  the  user 
(Narechania et al. 2020).

There is a line of research arguing to include more user-centered concepts within 
AI systems (Augstein et al. 2020). Our research expands on this work by focusing on 
federal litigation data and creating an easy-to-use AI interface with a built-in system 
that integrates natural language techniques and makes analytical decisions based on 
large amounts of data and dynamically chooses appropriate visualizations to better 
help  legal  scholars,  journalists,  and  lawyers  understand  and  answer  questions  they 
otherwise would not be able to answer. To do this we include a user-centered design 
process to discover user needs and ensure we have a system that works for all our 
target users.

3   Generating user needs

3.1   Interviews

In order to learn more about how legal scholars and journalists typically find answers 
to questions regarding court records, we first conducted user interviews (both in per-
son and over the phone). In-person interviews generally included observations first 
on how users used their current system for their legal research.

We  conducted  28  sets  of  interviews  on  a  total  of  38  people  (25  male  and  13 
female). Sixteen sets were in-person, with three out of the sixteen interviews con-
taining  three  people,  two  containing  two,  and  the  remaining  11  being  individual 
interviews.  We  recorded  in-person  semi-structured  interviews  at  the  participant’s 
location  with  no  compensation.  To  balance  perspectives  and  time  requirements, 
some  junior  and  senior  members  of  the  same  project  were  interviewed  together. 
Twelve sets of interviews were over the phone with two interviews having two peo-
ple on the call and the remaining ten phone interviews being individual interviews. 
For  the  interviews,  our  inclusion  criteria  were  participants  who  could  be  potential 
users of the system, such as legal scholars, lawyers, and journalists. For example, a 
legal scholar may want to examine court data for correlations or trends over time, a 
journalist may wonder whether a specific attribute of a judge (age, race, etc.) would 
impact the outcome of a case, and a lawyer may want to research similar cases out 

1 3A user‑centered approach to developing an AI system analyzing…552 

R. F. Adler et al.

there or perhaps previous cases by a specific judge in order to impact their current 
cases. The individuals chosen either responded to a direct email solicitation or con-
tacted us because of publicity on social media. In-person interviews were approxi-
mately an hour and phone interviews 30 min, as in-person interviews generally con-
tained  observations  as  well.  Those  interviewed  included  faculty  in  law,  sociology, 
and economics; lawyers; reporters; a journalism student; and directors of civil and 
criminal justice centers and commercial legal companies.

Our interview guide had 4 open-ended questions such as “What questions would 
you want to ask with a resource like this?” to help us understand participant’s ana-
lytical questions. During our phone and in-person interviews, we asked all partici-
pants  questions  relating  to  the  types  of  resources  they  currently  used,  what  would 
be beneficial for them, and the types of research questions they would like to ask. 
During in-person interviews, we also conducted observations where we asked par-
ticipants  to  show  us  the  current  tools  they  use  for  their  research.  Notes  from  each 
interview were examined in order to identify common themes.

Participants generally accessed and analyzed legal data through advanced Google 
searches, PACER, Westlaw, Caselaw Access Project, and Bloomberg Law. One par-
ticipant reported using Python or STATA for analysis and another participant had a 
custom-developed application that was created for her own research purposes.

Common  themes  that  emerged  when  analyzing  interview  results  were  in  terms 
of wanting structured data and answers to questions. First, many participants men-
tioned  having  the  federal  data  accessible  is  not  enough  as  it  is  too  overwhelming, 
needs to be structured, and linked with other datasets. In terms of answers to ques-
tions, participants felt they were limited by the tools they were currently using and 
wanted  to  ask  questions  of  the  data  that  they  currently  could  not  answer  such  as 
regarding  outcome,  motions,  and  finding  cases  by  specific  judges  or  judge  demo-
graphic. For example, one participant reported wanting to find out information such 
as Plaintiffs argue X issue in Y motion and it is successful Z% of the time. Another 
participant mentioned wanting to be able to search in different ways based on top-
ics, answers, and opinions (a written statement by a judge explaining a case decision 
and the underlying reasoning), and answer questions such as finding copyright cases 
that have an opinion. Another mentioned wanting visualizations of the data, such as 
timelines. One participant said he would only use a system that was similar to what 
he knew in terms of advanced searching. Only one participant mentioned not trust-
ing others to do the data manipulations and wanting to do it himself.

3.2   Surveys

In order to reach a larger pool of participants, we sent a 35-question survey to our 
legal  contacts  and  networks.  While  our  interview  targets  were  legal  scholars,  law-
yers, and journalists, we targeted our survey through email and social media to any-
one  interested  in  court  records.  The  survey  was  separate  from  the  interview  pro-
cess described above, though since the survey is anonymous and was posted on our 
social media it is possible there is some overlap. Participants were not compensated 
and  the  mean  duration  was  5.6  min.  Fifty  one  respondents  completed  the  survey 

1 3553

Fig. 2   Breakdown of survey participants by profession

Table 1   First four survey questions gauging respondents’ legal and technical skills

Q1 Which of the following best describes your level of legal understanding?
Legal expertise in multiple areas
I have some specialized knowledge about at least one area of law
I am generally familiar with how the US justice system works
I am not familiar with US law or the US justice system
Q2 Which of the following best describes your practical experience with litigation?
I am a civil and/or criminal litigator
I study or report on civil and/or criminal litigation
I have a general understanding of civil and/or criminal procedures
I am not familiar with litigation or the US justice system
Q3 Which of the following best describes your experience searching for information?
I have advanced coding skills and can search for and construct complex queries
I can conduct advanced searches to acquire data for my research
I am comfortable with keyword search using a search engine (e.g. Google, Bing, Westlaw, Lexis)
I am not comfortable with searching for information in the Internet
Q4 Which of the following best describes your experience analyzing data?
I can build programs (in R or Python for example) to extract information from data
I can use statistical tools (e.g., Tableau, Power BI, Stata, SPSS) to build visualizations
I am comfortable reading a quantitative graph, table, or chart
I am not comfortable with data analysis or representation

with 37 respondents providing occupational information. Of those respondents, 62% 
reported being academics with 17% of academics from law schools (Fig. 2). Exam-
ples of areas of legal expertise of our respondents included intellectual property law, 
immigration, race and ethnicity, criminal procedure, and health.

The goals of the survey were to determine user skills and research questions. We 
wanted to determine what questions users wanted to answer but currently were not 
able  to,  in  order  to  ensure  we  incorporated  the  correct  analytics  into  the  system. 
Our  survey  had  four  main  questions  with  response-based  follow-ups,  and  choices 
to these questions ranged from not familiar/comfortable, generally familiar/comfort-
able, advanced, and expert (see Table 1).

1 3A user‑centered approach to developing an AI system analyzing…554 

R. F. Adler et al.

Fig. 3   Participants’ self-ranked levels of data and legal expertise

Our survey showed that the majority of our respondents do not have the neces-
sary technical skills to conduct complex data analysis. In terms of searching for 
information,  we  found  that  53%  of  the  respondents  were  only  comfortable  with 
general  keyword  searching,  which  we  denote  as  Generally  Familiar,  with  37% 
conducting  advanced  searches  (Advanced),  and  only  10%  had  advanced  coding 
skills to search for and construct complex queries (Expert). See Fig. 3. Similarly, 
51% of respondents were comfortable reading graphs (Generally Familiar), 30% 
were  able  to  use  statistical  tools  (Advanced),  and  only  12%  were  able  to  build 
programs to extract information from data (Expert). Note that 8% of the respond-
ents reported not being comfortable with data analysis (Not Familiar).

Most  of  our  potential  users  have  a  general  understanding  of  the  U.S.  justice 
system.  In  terms  of  their  legal  knowledge,  10%  were  not  familiar  with  the  jus-
tice system (Not Familiar) while 41% were generally familiar with how the U.S. 
justice  system  works  (Generally  Familiar).  The  remaining  22%  (Advanced)  and 
27% (Expert) had legal expertise in one or more areas respectively. With regard 
to  their  litigation  expertise,  8%  were  not  familiar  with  litigation  (Not  Familiar), 
63% of the respondents had a general understanding of civil and/or criminal pro-
cedures  (Generally  Familiar),  20%  studied  litigation  (Advanced),  and  10%  were 
litigators (Expert).

We conducted analysis across all 4 dimensions, mapping responses to ordinal val-
ues 0 to 3, where 0 = Not Familiar and 3 = Expert. Figure 4 shows a scatterplot of 
the survey results. For simplicity, we only include analysis across legal expertise and 
data analytical expertise which show that few participants had both advanced legal 
and data analytical skills and in fact the majority of participants had low analytical 
skills. Based on our results, we generated four types of personas:

(1)  Basic Users- Low Legal and Technical Expertise (Lower Left Quadrant): 13 
participants (25.5%) had low legal and low technical skills. We call these users 
Basic Users. These users were at most generally familiar with the US justice 
system and comfortable reading a quantitative graph, table, or chart.

1 3555

Fig. 4   Scatterplot of Participants’ legal and data analytical skills

(2)  Domain Experts- Legal Expertise with Low Technical Skills (Upper Left Quad-
rant): 17 participants (33.3%) had high legal expertise with low technical skills. 
This is our largest quadrant and we therefore name them our Domain Experts. 
These users have the domain knowledge with legal expertise in one or more areas 
of law, but lack statistical or coding skills.

(3)  Advanced Users- Technical Experts with Low Legal Expertise (Lower Right 
Quadrant): 13 participants (25.5%) had high technical but low legal expertise. 
We name these our Advanced Users, however, we note that only five of them 
had coding skills. In other words, while they had statistical skills to build visu-
alizations, few could build programs (in R or Python for example) to extract 
information from data.

(4)  Legal Analysts- High Legal and Technical Expertise (Upper Right Quadrant): 8 
participants (15.7%) had both high legal and technical expertise. We call these 
users Legal Analysts as they have legal expertise in one or more areas of law in 
addition to advanced data interpretation skills such that they could use statistical 
tools to build visualizations or even code. The smallest number of participants 
fell into this quadrant, as the majority of our participants with legal expertise 
did not have advanced technical experience. In fact, only one participant in this 
category reported being able to program to extract information from data, with 
no participant reporting having a high level of Legal Expertise as well as coding 
experience (the high/high category).

In order to find out more about their experiences with data, we also asked them 
questions pertaining to what types of questions they were currently trying to answer, 
what obstacles they encountered, and what questions they would like to explore but 
are unable to. Some examples we found for what participants were currently asking 
with the data, included: “Who was judge? Who was refugee in asylum case (name 

1 3A user‑centered approach to developing an AI system analyzing…556 

R. F. Adler et al.

and other PII)?”; “Is there a relationship between characteristics of sentencing and 
the reentry process, including monetary sanctions and probationary requirements?”.
Sample responses for what questions users would like to ask but are currently not 

able to include:

“I  would  love  to  assess  how  predictive  a  person’s  criminal  record/history, 
especially juvenile history, is of future gun offenses. I would also love to know 
whether sending someone to prison (for a gun offense) has both an individual 
and general deterrence effect.”
“I  don’t  have  specific  questions,  but  as  a  journalist  [I]  would  love  simple 
access  to  legal  cases.  I  have  tried  (and  been  confused  by)  PACER;  I  cannot 
afford and don’t have training in Lexis searches.”

In  terms  of  challenges  they  experienced,  many  shared  that  they  had  limitations 
regarding  their  lack  of  data  skills,  some  examples  include:  “Unexpected  data  for-
mat while parsing data. Personal knowledge limitations.” and “lack of skills.” Many 
of  the  survey  respondents  reported  seeking  assistance  when  they  could  not  do  the 
analysis themselves.

3.3   User needs

Based on the user interviews, observations, and surveys, below we discuss three user 
needs:  Intuitive  Search  Interfaces;  Answers  to  Research  Questions;  and  Access  to 
Raw and Clean Data.

Intuitive  Search  Interfaces:  Many  users  mentioned  wanting  better  searching 
options/filters to limit cases of interest. They wanted an easier-to-use user interface 
for searching. Some users mentioned wanting to have key cases appear, similar cases 
appear, and the ability to search by specific entities they were interested in such as a 
judge or location. In addition, they wanted to have graph visualization of this data.

Answers  to  Research  Questions:  Many  of  our  users  mentioned  that  they  would 
benefit  from  a  system  that  was  able  to  answer  more  advanced  research  questions 
through  data  analysis  that  they  were  incapable  of  doing  themselves.  Furthermore, 
they  wanted  results  to  be  in  terms  of  visualizations  to  make  it  easier  for  them  to 
obtain and view answers to questions they were unable to answer themselves.

Access to Raw and Clean Data: While the majority of our users were not com-
fortable with code, some participants with high data analytical skills wanted to have 
access to the raw data to perform their own analysis. While these participants men-
tioned not trusting analysis unless they did it themselves, they did want a system that 
would process and standardize the data in order to make it more consistently struc-
tured, for example, tracking cases across different courts.

The  user  feedback  also  led  to  the  development  of  three  main  use  cases  for  our 

system:

1.  Users who want only a way to search and find relevant case documents, e.g. search 

fee waivers granted.

1 3557

2.  Users who want more targeted analyses, such as with cases regarding a particular 
judge, e.g. comparing if one judge takes longer than another with cases pertaining 
to Habeas Corpus.

3.  Users who want more advanced analyses on the system, such as scrutinizing past 
trends, e.g. has the average number of cases per judge gone up in recent years for 
different districts.

While data scientists may be able to run these analyses themselves, it would take 
considerable time. An automated system would save time for those who know how 
to do their own data analysis and provide transparency and answers to questions for 
people who do not have a strong technical background.

4   SCALES OKN: a legal analytics platform

To  address  the  needs  described  in  the  previous  section,  particularly  pertaining  to 
search  and  question-answering  leveraging  data  analysis  outside  the  capabilities  of 
the  users,  we  developed  our  own  end-to-end  platform  consisting  of  an  underlying 
AI  engine  and  a  natural  language  notebook.  These  together  comprise  an  intricate 
AI platform that is able to understand users’ intent and automatically determine the 
appropriate analytics given that intent and the context. We utilize a database of court 
records  imported  from  PACER  to  conduct  the  legal  analyses.  The  work  discussed 
below was introduced in Paley et al. (2021).

4.1   AI system

The  platform’s  AI  system  utilizes  a  domain  ontology,  an  operation  space  ontol-
ogy, and an inference engine. The domain ontology is a configuration that specifies 
semantic information about the domain and maps these to a standard SQL database 
schema. The operation ontology details the space of possible operations depending 
on the domain semantics. By leveraging both of these, the engine automatically gen-
erates available frontend mechanics (e.g. appropriate filters for different underlying 
data types) and their corresponding implementations (e.g. query builders). Further-
more, it pulls from those domain semantics and analytic ontology to derive all avail-
able and appropriate analytic plans, their corresponding natural-language represen-
tation for user interaction (e.g., Average Case Duration Year-Over-Year grouped by 
District),  and  their  answer  with  appropriate  visual  representation  (e.g.  line  graph, 
bar graph).

1 3A user‑centered approach to developing an AI system analyzing…558 

R. F. Adler et al.

Fig. 5   Interface from the point of view of 1) Search (the ability to filter a set by entities and free text), 2) 
Context (the collection of cases in our focus, defined by the filters), and 3) Questions (the ability to ask 
questions about the context and elements within it)

4.2   Natural language notebook user experience

The core interface of our system is based on the ‘notebook’ platform pioneered by 
Mathematica and popularized by the Jupyter notebook project (Ragan-Kelley et al. 
2014;  Kluyver  et  al.  2016).  In  our  previous  work,  we  coined  this  the  natural  lan-
guage notebook user experience, where users can drive data analysis and exploration 
without the need to code or write SQL.

In Fig. 5, we show our web-based interface along with a high-level depiction of 
the  interactions  between  user  and  system  across  these  views  in  Fig.  6.  Users  can 
interact with this system via filters or asking questions. The former allows users to 
segment the space, the latter allows users to invoke analysis even when they them-
selves don’t know what those analytics are. A user can add filters to narrow the dis-
played results (for example, specifying the district or name of the judge) and click 
on a row to view the original case document. If a user enters a keyword search (one 
of the filter options, ‘Docket Entries’), those keywords are highlighted directly in the 
docket.1  

Users can also do different kinds of analysis via basic and complex aggregations. 
Basic aggregations include questions such as determining the average duration of a 

1  Note that some functionality is still in the prototype phase. For example, the Download Dockets button 
on the bottom right of Fig. 5 is currently a placeholder and will be implemented in a future iteration.

1 3559

Fig. 6   A high-level user flow of notebook interactions, with Steps 1 and 2 being optional in support of 
driving analysis via Analysis Statements

case (Fig. 7), which can be refined by searching within it, such as for the Northern 
District of Illinois (N.D. IL) as each notebook’s search context is connected to the 
analyses  of  that  cell.  Complex  aggregations  can  include  asking  questions  such  as 
how the number of habeas corpus cases (legal actions which determine whether the 
detention of an individual is lawful) per capita varies by jurisdiction. Users can also 
do  time-series  analyses  of  the  search  results  such  as  graphing  how  the  number  of 
immigration cases changes over time for a given period. Simple aggregations return 
answers in natural text whereas more complex ones return appropriate visualizations 
to the user.

Through these functionalities, users can do legal analysis such as looking at the 
evolution  of  case  duration  over  time  by  looking  at  how  it  changes  year  over  year 
(Fig. 8a) or the relationship between whether a party has legal representation or is 
self-represented (“pro se”) and the likelihood that a request for a fee waiver will be 
granted (Fig. 8b). The analyses depicted are both run in the data context of cases in 
the Northern District of Illinois (per applying the district filter “N.D. IL”), but given 
the system’s mechanics, these same analyses could be run against any filtered data 
context.

1 3A user‑centered approach to developing an AI system analyzing…560 

R. F. Adler et al.

Fig. 7   Asking questions

Fig. 8   Asking  questions:  a  Case  duration  year-over-year  b  Fee  waiver  (a  request  to  the  court  to  waive 
court  fees  based  on  inability  to  pay)  grant  rate  based  on  whether  a  party  has  legal  representation  or  is 
self-represented (“pro se”)

5   Results from usability testing

To  test  the  viability  of  our  design,  participants  were  recruited  for  usability  test-
ing  through  our  network  of  legal  scholars,  lawyers,  and  journalists.  Usability  test-
ing included a total of 15 participants: 13 from law (lawyers, legal scholars, a legal 
assistant, and law librarian), a JD/PhD candidate in sociology and law, and a jour-
nalist.  Seven  participants  overlapped  in  interviews  and  usability  testing  (surveys 
were  anonymous  so  overlapping  participants  from  surveys  and  usability  testing  is 
unknown). Each session was 45 min and was conducted over Zoom with two inter-
viewers and one participant. Sessions were recorded for further analysis.

1 3561

We intentionally introduced the UX without a tutorial first in order to determine 
how  intuitive  it  would  be  for  participants  to  learn  without  guidance,  however  we 
tested participants in five specific tasks which were in ascending order of difficulty 
to help them gradually become comfortable with the interface, these were: search, 
analysis returning a number, analysis returning a chart, analysis based on a filter, and 
analysis  based  on  multiple  filters.  These  include:  “Conduct  a  search  for  all  judges 
with Kennelly in their name. How many results appear?” “What is the average case 
duration?”, “Find the average case duration by year. Which year has the lowest in 
our  dataset?”,  “For  all  cases  in  the  ’N.D.  IL’  district,  which  year  had  the  highest 
average case duration?”, “For all habeas cases in the 11th circuit, how often on aver-
age are fee waiver requests granted?” We briefly provided help if needed. To meas-
ure the efficiency of the system, we examined the number of attempts participants 
took to answer each of the 5 scenarios. To measure the effectiveness of the system 
we examined the percent of completion of the tasks without help.

After concluding the scenarios, participants were given time to try out their own 
scenarios that they would be interested in searching for and conducting analysis on. 
We  asked  participants  to  think  aloud,  a  method  in  usability  testing  (Lewis  1982; 
Nielsen  1994),  in  order  for  us  to  hear  what  they  were  trying  to  do  and  how  they 
thought to do it.

All participants were presented with a survey to complete at the end of the ses-
sion. We used the System Usability Scale (SUS), which is a 10 question tool using 
a  5-point  Likert  scale  ranging  from  1,  strongly  disagree,  to  5,  strongly  agree  for 
assessing a system’s usability (Brooke 1996). We used the modified SUS by Bangor 
et al. (2008) which uses the more recognizable word “awkward” instead of “cum-
bersome.”  To  calculate  the  SUS  scores,  1  is  subtracted  from  the  raw  score  of  the 
odd-numbered  items  (those  items  phrased  in  a  positive  way)  and  the  raw  score  of 
the even-numbered items (those items phrased in a negative way) is subtracted from 
5. The sum of the scores are multiplied by 2.5 to reach a “standardized SUS Score” 
which is out of 100.

Our goal during post-session analysis was to understand if the system was easy 
to  use,  would  be  used  frequently,  and  potential  improvements.  Therefore,  we  also 
asked them to comment on features they liked, didn’t like, and questions they would 
have liked to ask the system.

5.1   Task completion

We found that participants were generally in three categories:

Category 1: Completed the scenario in 1 attempt without help.
Category 2: Completed the scenario in more than 1 attempt without help.
Category 3: Completed the scenario in more than 1 attempt with help.
Two coders calculated the number of participants who fell into each category for 
each scenario with a 93% agreement. When there were differences, we defaulted to 
the higher, more critical category. Out of the 75 instances (15 participants X 5 sce-
narios), 46 were in Category 1 (61%). In over a majority of cases, participants were 

1 3A user‑centered approach to developing an AI system analyzing…562 

R. F. Adler et al.

able  to  figure  out  where  to  go  relatively  quickly  without  any  prior  knowledge  and 
without any help. 11 (15%) instances fell into Category 2, where participants did not 
need help and were able to complete the scenario on their own. In all except one of 
these cases, participants took two attempts to complete the task with the remaining 
participant completing it in 3 attempts. Last, 18 participants (24%) were in Category 
3 and would not have been able to complete the task without guidance.

We found that Category 3 generally occurred for the following four reasons:

1.  Filter Dropdown: Participants used the default ‘docket entries’ filter without 

selecting the appropriate filter.

2.  Add Analysis: Participants did not realize there was an analysis component below 

without guidance.

3.  Filter/Analysis: Participants did not realize the relationship between filtering and 

then analyzing those results.

4.  Update Results Button: Participants had trouble remembering to press the update 

results button when starting a filter before beginning an analysis.

5.2   SUS results

We  normalized  our  SUS  scores  using  the  formula  above  to  obtain  a  value  out  of 
100, where 68 is considered an average usability (Sauro and Lewis 2016) and good 
usability is at 71.4 (Bangor et al. 2009; Lewis 2018). Our participants’ average SUS 
score  was  computed  as  72.83  which  is,  therefore,  considered  good  usability.  Fea-
tures participants liked included both the searching and analysis capabilities. Some 
sample comments from the survey include:

“I liked the ability to search entire dockets and to pull up pre-defined analytics. 
I could see these features being very useful.”
“the ability to add analysis on top of a search that drilled down by lawyer etc. 
seems useful”
“Great variables (both filter and analysis). Loved the charts.”
“Very few steps required to get the data – instant results.”
“I  liked  that  you  could  add  multiple  features  and  then  ask  a  questions  [sic] 
based on those results.”

Features  participants  did  not  like  included  comments  on  the  user  experience, 
missing  features,  and  performance.  Below  we  summarize  their  concerns  in  those 
three categories.

•  UX flow comments:

•  The initial + sign for filtering was unclear.
•  Add pre-populated responses when using the filter.
•  The analysis menu was too long to scroll through.
•  The relationship between the top (search) and bottom (analysis) was unclear.

1 3563

•  Missing features:

•  They wanted an export option for their results.

•  Performance-Related:

•  Full docket search was slow.

We  also  asked  participants  what  questions  they  would  like  to  answer  regarding 
legal analyses in order to improve the analysis component in future design iterations. 
Some comments included analysis pertaining to outcomes, motions, unsealed dock-
ets, average time to disposition of a motion, and how frequently cases are appealed 
or went to a jury trial in a particular district.

6   Discussion

Our main research question was whether we could successfully develop an AI sys-
tem  using  user-centered  design  principles  to  allow  academics,  journalists,  or  the 
public—particularly  those  without  technical  or  data  analytical  skills—to  be  able 
to  ask  questions  of  federal  court  data  and  receive  answers  from  our  system  that 
abstracts  away  the  underlying  data  analytics  involved.  Results  from  usability  test-
ing showed that participants liked the interface, found it to be usable, and felt they 
would use it frequently. Participants found it easy to navigate and even when need-
ing help were able to apply that knowledge to the future tasks.

Our user interviews, observations, and surveys highlighted users’ two main needs: 
(1) intuitive search interfaces and (2) answer to research questions. We chose a note-
book format and focused its capabilities on search and analysis, abstracting away com-
plex analytics to address the first need. The user’s search choices specify an informa-
tion context that determines which of their research questions can be answered, thus 
moving some cognitive load from the user to the platform. We addressed the second 
need  by  focusing  on  natural  language  queries  that  more  directly  link  analysis  state-
ments with the questions that users have using an answer modality that is dynamic.

A unique aspect of our research design is being able to answer questions without 
manually conducting data analysis. Judicial Analytics is defined as “big data meets 
court  dockets,”  and  referred  to  as  “the  next  wave  in  legal  research”  (Bissett  and 
Heinen  2017).  Judicial  analytics  can  lead  to  transparency  into  the  work  of  judges 
as well as discovering potential biases (Chen 2019; McGill and Salyzyn 2021). Our 
goal  supports  this  effort  as  we  design  an  interface  for  asking  legal  questions  and 
seamlessly obtaining analytical answers.

6.1   Limitations

There are limitations to our research, which include:

•  The state of the available data: Our sample draws on more than a quarter-million 
court dockets acquired through purchase and batch downloading from PACER. As 
data ingestion itself is a work in progress, the version of the application we tested 

1 3A user‑centered approach to developing an AI system analyzing…564 

R. F. Adler et al.

with users was connected to a database with ten years of data (2007 through 2016) 
for the Northern District of Illinois court, but only one year of data (2016) for all 
94 district courts across the U.S. Thus, the exploratory component of our tests was 
more engaging for users for whom the Northern District of Illinois was a subject of 
interest (and thus yielded more feedback), and less so for others.

•  A U.S. data focus: We are eager to explore the possibility of bringing our approach 
to  legal  datasets  sourced  from  other  countries.  In  subsequent  iterations,  we  will 
explore sourcing data from a second country and look to test user flows with rel-
evant domain experts.

•  Similarly,  the  lack  of  localization  to  support  non-English  language  interactions: 
The majority of the language presented to users through our platform’s UI is pulled 
from the configuration. Thus, the path towards localization is relatively easy to con-
template, but not yet implemented – our initial user tests were all in English and 
limited  to  English  speakers.  And  so,  in  addition  to  exploring  datasets  from  other 
legal  systems,  we  also  intend  to  test  the  capabilities  and  utility  of  our  language-
based approach in a second language in subsequent iterations.

•  “Possible”  vs  “Domain  Relevant”:  Our  overall  model  is  in  pursuit  of  leveraging 
configuration  and  data  semantics  to  simplify  and  constrain  the  space  of  available 
analysis based on what’s possible and what’s domain relevant. In our current itera-
tion, we have achieved the former – based on data types and relationships, we gen-
erate a set of analysis statement candidates that only includes those that can be run 
given the available data, ensuring that any user selection will successfully generate 
results. And while the majority of this set are also domain relevant, the ability to 
guarantee true relevance in a given domain – ensuring that any analysis statement 
is guaranteed to map to a domain-relevant question – is a matter of ongoing design 
and future iterations of our configuration will support mechanisms by which techni-
cal users can further control the space of analysis. For example, we compute judge 
tenure, a numeric value that represents a given judge’s time on the bench. Because 
our system recognizes judge tenure as numeric, it knows it can support users asking 
for the average judge tenure, maximum judge tenure, and minimum judge tenure. 
Further, it supports exploration of other metrics grouped by judge tenure (via state-
ments like “Average Case Duration grouped by Judge Tenure”). However, based on 
the knowledge that judge tenure is a numeric value, the system also provides access 
to total judge tenure, a sum of all derived judge tenures associated with all cases in 
the data view. No reasonable exploration of the domain would include such analysis 
despite the fact that it is supported at the data level.

6.2   Future work

Based  on  results  from  the  usability  testing,  we  plan  to  make  modifications  to  our 
user  interface  to  improve  the  user  experience  in  terms  of  Search  and  Analysis, 
Transparency, and Scalability.

Search and Analysis: In terms of the search features, we plan to integrate auto-
complete in the filter textbox and show all  possible options that are available.  For 
example,  when  entering  a  nature  of  suit  value,  users  will  be  able  to  see  all  the 

1 3565

possibilities instead of having to remember the options or look them up. Similar to 
the  “Add  Analysis”  text  near  the  analysis  filters,  we  plan  to  include  “Add  a  filter” 
message  near  the  search  filter,  as  some  participants  had  some  trouble  finding  the 
search box. Other changes include not having “docket entries” filter as the default 
option,  improving  the  speed  of  free  text  search  by  implementing  elasticsearch, 
including clarifying text making the connection between search and analysis more 
apparent, and allowing users to perform the analyses, using the information selected 
in the above filters, regardless of whether a user pressed the Update Results button.

We also plan to collapse the search view initially, so that the analysis is higher up 
and easier to find. While users want to have the option to verify the data that results 
from the search, some users did not notice the analysis option on the bottom until we 
pointed it out. Further, we plan to reorganize the analysis dropdown by categories 
and make it more obvious that they could type text in addition to scrolling through 
options.

A few of the more technically savvy users requested access to the data in order 
to conduct further analyses. These users mentioned not trusting a system. Research 
has shown that with the expansion of big data and visual analytics, users have uncer-
tainties and a lack of trust in artificial intelligence and visual analytics (Sacha et al. 
2015; Siau and Wang 2018). Therefore, after assisting the user in filtering the court 
records using a dynamic set of search parameters, we plan to allow the user to (1) 
take  a  snapshot  of  the  filtered  docket  set  using  a  download  button  and  (2)  export 
to csv their analysis results. While we are implementing the download docket and 
export to csv buttons as an incremental addition, our goal is to discover what they 
plan to do with that data in order to further refine our system in the future. This is an 
iterative user-centered design process which will lead to long-term improvements to 
the user experience of the platform.

Transparency:  We  plan  to  include  more  transparency  on  the  completion  of  the 
dataset, how we calculated fields (e.g. case duration, judge tenure), and clarification 
on entities displayed, for example explaining which judge we display on cases with 
multiple judges.

Scalability: We plan to incorporate additional dockets and other datasets in order 
to answer more types of questions. In addition, we will keep track of users’ search 
history,  include  the  ability  to  add  collaborators  to  a  Notebook,  and  create  a  sum-
marization  of  the  analysis.  Addressing  summarization  in  the  future  will  allow  us 
to  better  meet  the  needs  of  our  identified  user  personas  who  lack  domain  knowl-
edge. Furthermore, we created a separate web-based tagging tool where lawyers and 
law students tagged motions in dockets and classified them using machine learning. 
Next, we plan to tag outcomes as well. We also plan to create a similar generic tag-
ging  tool,  which  will  allow  users  to  tag  any  item  of  interest  in  the  docket  entries, 
such as orders, notices and affidavits, and use machine learning to recognize these 
tagged  items  so  that  they  can  also  be  included  as  searchable  items  in  the  future. 
Future work also involves abstracting the system so that it can be used for data anal-
ysis when given datasets in other domains, such as education.

1 3A user‑centered approach to developing an AI system analyzing…566 

R. F. Adler et al.

6.3   Implications for designing an AI system

Through the process of designing the SCALES Open Knowledge Network, we iden-
tified some key design implications for user-friendly AI systems.

Data  analytics  for  non-technical  users  requires  a  different  level  of  abstraction: 
Computer  science  is  well  known  for  leveraging  different  levels  of  abstraction  for 
types  of  users  and  applications  (Te’eni  and  Sani-Kuperberg  2005;  Te’eni  2017). 
However, as we abstract away some of the details, we lose some of the expressive-
ness; for instance, programming in a higher-level language gives users less control 
than coding in assembly. Similarly, our system abstracts away various steps of the 
analytical pipeline (e.g. data parsing and processing, visualization generation, avail-
able operations). However, our abstraction level is still more than sufficient to meet 
users’ needs and answer their questions, since all but two users (87%) said that they 
would use our system frequently (one of them was neutral and the other did not use 
docket sheets in their research). Furthermore, our design allowed many non-techni-
cal users to do analysis that was unavailable to them in platforms that had a larger 
space of possible analyses due to higher barriers to entry. This shows that there are 
more conducive levels of abstraction for data analytics that allow a wider set of users 
to use these interfaces.

Building  trust  in  AI  is  also  a  design  problem,  not  just  a  technical  one:  As  we 
move  to  integrate  AI  more  into  different  tools,  we  need  to  take  deliberate  design 
considerations  to  build  trust  between  users  and  AI  platforms.  The  issue  of  build-
ing trust for AI has been explored in other work (Sacha et al. 2015; Siau and Wang 
2018)  and  we  saw  it  be  a  significant  issue  in  our  design  validation.  For  instance, 
many  users  were  more  confident  in  using  the  system  due  to  the  capability  of  our 
system to show the original docket sheet data. Some users wanted even more infor-
mation,  with  questions  about  how  the  data  was  processed,  when  the  data  was  last 
updated, and the scope of the data (e.g. from which jurisdictions did we have data). 
And there were even some technically savvy users who did not trust the system at 
all and would have preferred to do all the analyses themselves. This indicates that 
building trust between users and AI is not merely a matter of model performance; 
rather, it will require design considerations that meet users’ needs for transparency.

Integrating a user-centered approach in developing an AI system can help with 
usability:  As  more  AI  systems  get  developed,  it  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  the 
users of the system by keeping them involved throughout the development lifecycle. 
By engaging with our users, both in the early phases (interviews and surveys) and in 
the later stages (usability testing) we were able to keep on top of what users’ needs 
were  and  what  they  still  needed  from  our  system.  AI  should  expand  beyond  the 
computational domain and integrate more human approaches through the inclusion 
of research teams composed of both AI and UX researchers (Margetis et al. 2021). 
Designing AI systems with a user perspective can help reduce potential biases in the 
system and algorithms and make them more transparent, which can be particularly 
useful in designing legal systems (Augstein et al. 2020).

1 3567

7   Conclusion

Based  on  user-centered  design  research,  we  interviewed,  observed,  and  surveyed 
potential users and designed an AI system that provides nontechnical users with a 
method for searching and finding answers to questions on federal court data. Legal 
scholars,  journalists,  policymakers,  and  social  scientists  can  use  the  system  to 
answer questions they have about the U.S. legal system even if they lack data analyt-
ics skills. Future research will expand on the interface to include additional datasets 
and custom tagging of data.

Acknowledgements  This  material  is  based  upon  work  supported  by  the  National  Science  Foundation 
Convergence Accelerator Program under grant no. 1937123 and grant no. 2033604. 

Open Access  This  article  is  licensed  under  a  Creative  Commons  Attribution  4.0  International  License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is 
not  permitted  by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,  you will  need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen 
ses/ by/4. 0/.

References

Aitamurto  T,  Ananny  M,  Anderson  CW,  Birnbaum  L,  Diakopoulos  N,  Hanson  M,  Hullman  J,  Ritchie 
N  (2019)  HCI  for  accurate,  impartial  and  transparent  journalism:  Challenges  and  solutions.  In: 
Extended abstracts of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. pp 1–8
Alexander CS, Feizollahi MJ (2020) On dragons, caves, teeth, and claws: legal analytics and the problem 
of court data access. In: Computational legend studies, Promises challanges data-driven res 95
Arar R, Ren G, Jiang S, Becker V, Huang L, Liu EY (2018) Applying user-centered design to business 
modeling: CBM.next as a case study. In: 2018 IEEE 20th conference on business informatics (CBI), 
pp 164–169

Augstein M, Buschek D, Herder E, Loepp B, Yigitbas E, Ziegler J (2020) UCAI 2020: workshop on user-

centered artificial intelligence. Mensch und comput 2020-workshopband

Bangor A, Kortum PT, Miller JT (2008) An empirical evaluation of the system usability scale. Int J Hum 

Comput Interact 24:574–594

Bangor A, Kortum P, Miller J (2009) Determining what individual SUS scores mean: adding an adjective 

rating scale. J Usability Stud 4:114–123

Bertot JC, Jaeger PT, McClure CR (2008) Citizen-centered e-government services: benefits, costs, and 
research needs. In: Proceedings of the 2008 international conference on digital government research. 
pp 137–142

Bissett J, Heinen M (2017) Beyond court decisions—dockets, documents, and analytics. Colo Law 46:59
Brooke J (1996) SUS-A quick and dirty usability scale. In: Usability evaluation in industry, pp 189–194
Brown T (2019) Change by design: how design thinking transforms organizations and inspires innova-

tion. HarperBusiness

Carter  DR,  Asencio  R,  Wax  A,  DeChurch  LA,  Contractor  NS  (2015)  Little  teams,  big  data:  big  data 
provides new opportunities for teams theory. Ind Organ Psychol 8:550–555. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ 
iop. 2015. 82

Chen  DL  (2019)  Judicial  analytics  and  the  great  transformation  of  American  Law.  Artif  Intell  Law 

27:15–42

1 3A user‑centered approach to developing an AI system analyzing…568 

R. F. Adler et al.

Cook  KA,  Thomas  JJ  (2005)  Illuminating  the  path:  the  research  and  development  agenda  for  visual 

analytics

Courts US (2020) Federal Judicial Caseload Statistics 2020. https:// www. uscou rts. gov/ stati stics- repor ts/ 

feder al- judic ial- casel oad- stati stics- 2020. Accessed 14 Dec 2021

Curtotti M, McCreath E, Bruce T, Frug S, Weibel W, Ceynowa N (2015) Machine learning for readability 
of  legislative  sentences.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  15th  International  Conference  on  Artificial  Intel-
ligence and Law, pp 53–62

Di  Porto  F  (2021)  Algorithmic  disclosure  rules.  Artif  Intell  Law.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 

s10506- 021- 09302-7

Ebner M, Holzinger A (2007) Successful implementation of user-centered game based learning in higher 

education: an example from civil engineering. Comput Educ 49:873–890

Evergreen SDH (2019) Effective data visualization: the right chart for the right data. SAGE publications, 

Thousand Oaks, CA

González-Bailón S (2013) Social science in the era of big data. Policy Internet 5:147–160
Hagan M (2016) The user experience of the internet as a legal help service: defining standards for the 

next generation of user-friendly online legal services. Virginia J Law Technol 20:394–465

Hagan MD (2018) A human-centered design approach to access to justice: generating new prototypes and 
hypotheses for intervention to make courts user-friendly. Indiana J Law Soc Equal 6:199–239
Hagan M (2020) Design comes to the law school. In: Denvir C (ed) Modernising legal education. Cam-

brige University Press, Cambridge, England, pp 109–125

Hagan M (2014) Design thinking and law: a perfect match. Law Pract Today
Harte  R,  Glynn  L,  Rodríguez-Molinero  A,  Baker  PMA,  Scharf  T,  Quinlan  LR,  OLaighin  G  (2017)  A 
human-centered design methodology to enhance the usability, human factors, and user experience of 
connected health systems: a three-phase methodology. JMIR Hum Factors 4:e8

Holzinger A (2013) Human-computer interaction and knowledge discovery (hci-kdd): what is the benefit 
of bringing those two fields to work together? In: International conference on availability, reliability, 
and security, pp 319–328

Howe D, Costanzo M, Fey P, Gojobori T, Hannick L, Hide W, Hill D, Kania R, Schaeffer M, St Pierre S, 

Twigger S, White O, Rhee S (2008) Big data: The future of biocuration. Nature 455:47–50

Iacobelli F, Adler RF, Buitrago D, Buscemi J, Corden ME, Perez-Tamayo A, Penedo FJ, Rodriguez M, 
Yanez  BR  (2018)  Designing  an  mHealth  application  to  bridge  health  disparities  in  Latina  breast 
cancer  survivors:  a  community-supported  design  approach.  Des  Heal  2:58–76.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1080/ 24735 132. 2018. 14528 71

Jackson D (2016) Human-centered legal tech: integrating design in legal education. Law Teach 50:82–97. 

https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 03069 400. 2016. 11464 68

Jaeger  PT  (2008)  User-centered  policy  evaluations  of  section  508  of  the  rehabilitation  act:  Evaluating 
e-government web sites for accessibility for persons with disabilities. J Disabil Policy Stud 19:24–33
Keim D, Andrienko G, Fekete J-D, Görg C, Kohlhammer J, Melançon G (2008) Visual analytics: Defini-

tion, process, and challenges. Information visualization. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 154–175
Khoury MJ, Ioannidis JPA (2014) Big data meets public health. Science 346:1054–1055. https:// doi. org/ 

10. 1126/ scien ce. aaa27 09

Kluyver  T,  Ragan-Kelley  B,  Pérez  F,  Granger  BE,  Bussonnier  M,  Frederic  J,  Kelley  K,  Hamrick  JB, 
Grout  J,  Corlay  S  (2016)  Jupyter  Notebooks-a  publishing  format  for  reproducible  computational 
workflows. In: ELPUB, pp 87–90

Lettieri N, Guarino A, Malandrino D (2018) E-science and the law. three experimental platforms for legal 

analytics. Legal knowledge and information systems. IOS Press, Amsterdam, pp 71–80

Lewis  C  (1982)  Using  the"  thinking-aloud"  method  in  cognitive  interface  design.  IBM  TJ  Watson 

Research Center Yorktown Heights, NY

Lewis  JR  (2018)  The  system  usability  scale:  past,  present,  and  future.  Int  J  Hum  Comput  Interact 

34:577–590

Mackinlay J, Hanrahan P, Stolte C (2007) Show me: automatic presentation for visual analysis. IEEE 

Trans vis Comput Graph 13:1137–1144

Margetis G, Ntoa S, Antona M, Stephanidis C (2021) Human-centered design of artificial intelligence. 

Handb human factors ergonomics, pp. 1085–1106

1 3569

Martin  PW  (2018)  District  court  opinions  that  remain  hidden  despite  a  longstanding  congressional 
mandate of transparency – the result of judicial autonomy and systemic indifference. Cornell Leg 
Stud Res Pap No 17–38

McGill  J,  Salyzyn  A  (2021)  Judging  by  the  numbers:  judicial  analytics,  the  justice  system  and  its 

stakeholders. Dalhousie LJ 44:249–284

Narechania A, Srinivasan A, Stasko J (2020) NL4DV: a toolkit for generating analytic specifications 

for data visualization from natural language queries. IEEE Trans vis Comput Graph 27:369–379

Newman DR, Doherty U (2008) Making the law accessible to non-lawyers: effects of different kinds 
of  expertise  on  perceived  usability  of  online  legal  information  services.  Behav  Inf  Technol 
27:423–437. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01449 29060 11110 02

Nielsen J (1994) Usability engineering. Morgan Kaufmann
Norman  DA,  Draper  SW  (1986)  User  centered  system  design.  Lawrence  Erlbaum,  Hillsdale,  N.J., 

USA

Obermeyer Z, Emanuel EJ (2016) Predicting the Future—Big Data, Machine Learning, and Clinical 

Medicine. N Engl J Med 375:1216–1219. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1056/ NEJMp 16061 81

Paley A, Zhao ALL, Pack H, Servantez S, Adler RF, Sterbentz M, Pah A, Schwartz D, Barrie C, Einars-
son A, Hammond K (2021) From data to information: automating data science to explore the US 
court system. In: Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
and Law, pp 119–128

Park S-H, Lee D-G, Park J-S, Kim J-W (2021) A survey of research on data analytics-based legal tech. 

Sustainability 13:8085

Passera S, Haapio H (2013) Transforming contracts from legal rules to user-centered communication 
tools: a human-information interaction challenge. Commun Des Q Rev 1:38–45. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1145/ 24664 89. 24664 98

Passera S, Kankaanranta A, Louhiala-Salminen L (2017) Diagrams in contracts: fostering understand-

ing in global business communication. IEEE Trans Prof Commun 60:118–146

Passera S (2012) Enhancing contract usability and user experience through visualization - an experi-
mental  evaluation.  In:  2012  16th  International  conference  on  information  visualisation,  pp 
376–382

Patnaik D, Becker R (1999) Needfinding: the why and how of uncovering people’s needs. Des Manag J 

Former Ser 10:37–43

Quintanilla VD (2017) Human-centered civil justice design. Penn State Law Rev 121:745–806
Ragan-Kelley M, Perez F, Granger B, Kluyver T, Ivanov P, Frederic J, Bussonnier M (2014) The Jupyter/
IPython architecture: a unified view of computational research, from interactive exploration to com-
munication and publication. In: AGU fall meeting abstracts. pp H44D-07

Sacha D, Senaratne H, Kwon BC, Ellis G, Keim DA (2015) The role of uncertainty, awareness, and trust 

in visual analytics. IEEE Trans vis Comput Graph 22:240–249

Sauro J, Lewis JR (2016) Quantifying the user experience: practical statistics for user research. Morgan 

Kaufmann, Cambridge, MA

Scholtz J (2017) User-centered evaluation of visual analytics. Synth Lect vis 5:i–71
Sekaran K, Chandana P, Jeny JRV, Meqdad MN, Kadry S (2020) Design of optimal search engine using 

text summarization through artificial intelligence techniques. Telkomnika 18:1268–1274

Siau K, Wang W (2018) Building trust in artificial intelligence, machine learning, and robotics. Cut Bus 

Technol J 31:47–53

Te’eni D (2017) the strange absence of abstraction levels in designing HCI. In: International conference 

on group decision and negotiation. pp 15–29

Te’eni D, Sani-Kuperberg Z (2005) Levels of abstraction in designs of human–computer interaction: the 

case of e-mail. Comput Human Behav 21:817–830

Verdegem  P,  Verleye  G  (2009)  User-centered  E-Government  in  practice:  a  comprehensive  model  for 

measuring user satisfaction. Gov Inf Q 26:487–497

Wang D, Weisz JD, Muller M, Ram P, Geyer W, Dugan C, Tausczik Y, Samulowitz H, Gray A (2019) 
Human-ai collaboration in data science: exploring data scientists’ perceptions of automated AI. Proc 
ACM Hum Comput Interact 3:1–24

Weerakkody  V,  Irani  Z,  Kapoor  K,  Sivarajah  U,  Dwivedi  YK  (2017)  Open  data  and  its  usability:  an 
empirical view from the Citizen’s perspective. Inf Syst Front 19:285–300. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s10796- 016- 9679-1

1 3A user‑centered approach to developing an AI system analyzing…570 

R. F. Adler et al.

Wongsuphasawat K, Qu Z, Moritz D, Chang R, Ouk F, Anand A, Mackinlay J, Howe B, Heer J (2017) 
Voyager 2: augmenting visual analysis with partial view specifications. In: Proceedings of the 2017 
CHI conference on human factors in computing systems, pp 2648–2659

Zhong H, Xiao C, Tu C, Zhang T, Liu Z, Sun M (2020) How does NLP benefit legal system: a summary 

of legal artificial intelligence. Preprint at https:// arxiv. org/ abs/ 2004. 12158

Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.

1 3
