# Fuente
- archivo: Generative_AI_in_Court.pdf
- ruta: C:\Users\matia\desarrollo\judiciales2026ush\ingesta\trabajos\academicos\Generative_AI_in_Court.pdf
- extraido: 2026-04-24T11:34:03

# Contenido

Generative AI in court

Frosio, G. (2024). Generative AI in court. In N. Koutras, & N. Selvadurai (Eds.), Recreating creativity, reinventing
inventiveness: AI and intellectual property law Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003260127-2

Published in:
Recreating creativity, reinventing inventiveness: AI and intellectual property law

Document Version:
Peer reviewed version

Queen's University Belfast - Research Portal:
Link to publication record in Queen's University Belfast Research Portal

Publisher rights
Copyright 2024 Routledge.
This work is made available online in accordance with the publisher’s policies. Please refer to any applicable terms of use of the publisher.

General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Queen's University Belfast Research Portal is retained by the author(s) and / or other
copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated
with these rights.

Take down policy
The Research Portal is Queen's institutional repository that provides access to Queen's research output. Every effort has been made to
ensure that content in the Research Portal does not infringe any person's rights, or applicable UK laws. If you discover content in the
Research Portal that you believe breaches copyright or violates any law, please contact openaccess@qub.ac.uk.

Open Access
This research has been made openly available by Queen's academics and its Open Research team.  We would love to hear how access to
this research benefits you. – Share your feedback with us: http://go.qub.ac.uk/oa-feedback

Download date:24. Apr. 2026

GENERATIVE AI IN COURT 
Giancarlo Frosio 

in Nikos Koutras and Niloufer Selvadurai (eds), Recreating Creativity, Reinventing Inventiveness 
- International Perspectives on AI and IP Governance (Routledge, forthcoming 2023) 

ABSTRACT 

In  the  age  of  burgeoning  AI-driven  creativity,  the  song  "Heart  on  My  Sleeve"  stands  out, 
attributing its sound to famed artists like Drake and The Weeknd without their participation. This 
product  of  'Generative  AI'  is  a  testament  to  AI's  creative  capabilities.  However,  amidst  the 
advancement  of  AI  in  the  creative  domain,  the  intersection  of  technology  and  copyright  law is 
witnessing  unprecedented  challenges.  Legal  realms  are  ablaze  with  contentious  cases.  Getty 
Images' legal battle with Stability AI, accused of unlawfully harnessing copyrighted images for 
their AI art tool Stable Diffusion, underscores this tension. Parallelly, artists like Sarah Andersen, 
Kelly  McKernan,  and  Karla  Ortiz  have  taken  on  AI  solution  providers,  alleging  misuse  of 
copyrighted content. Sarah Silverman and fellow authors have similarly contested OpenAI and 
Meta's practices. The justification at the heart of these case is two-fold: the rightsholders' intent 
to  preserve  their  control  over  evolving  technology  that  repurposes  existing  content,  and  the 
disruptive  potential  of  AI  in  reshaping  a  traditionally  human-centred  creative  landscape.  This 
collision  spotlights  global  courts  grappling  with  AI's  challenges  to  conventional  copyright 
concepts. As AI challenges conventional notions of authorship and copyright, critical questions 
arise: Can AI infringe copyright through its learning process? Can AI be an author and own a 
copyright? Can AI-generated outputs violate copyrights? This chapter delves into these pressing 
issues  pending  before  multiple  courts,  contextualizing  them  within  the  global  landscape  of 
Generative AI and its potential disruptions to the creative industry.  

INTRODUCTION 

The spring sensation, “Heart on My Sleeve,” has taken the world by storm. Though it bears the 
unmistakable  hallmarks  of  superstars  Drake  and  The  Weeknd,  neither  artist  contributed  to  the 
song's creation. Instead, the track emerged from the power of artificial intelligence, mimicking 
their iconic voices with uncanny accuracy. Launched by an anonymous TikTok creator, its rapid 
viral  ascent  has  resulted  in  millions  of streams,  yet  also  ignited significant  copyright concerns. 
Universal Music Group, representing The Weeknd, has voiced strong opposition to such AI-driven 
musical creations, challenging the ethics and legality of the technology.1 This is not an isolated 
dispute but rather the forefront of an escalating debate over intellectual property rights in the AI 
era.2 The surge in AI's capabilities in the realm of creativity is remarkable, underscored by the rise 

 See 

e.g.  Ben  Schreckinger, 

 Professor, Chair in Intellectual Property and Technology Law, and Director of the Global Intellectual Property and 
Technology  (G-IPTech)  Centre,  School  of  Law,  Queen’s  University  Belfast;  Non-Resident  Fellow,  Stanford  Law 
School Center for Internet and Society; Associate Faculty, NEXA Center for Internet and Society.  
1
vs 

24, 
https://www.politico.com/newsletters/digital-future-daily/2023/04/24/ai-vs-the-culture-industry-00093550.  
2 See “Master List of lawsuits v. AI, ChatGPT, OpenAI, Microsoft, Meta, Midjourney & other AI cos.”, (14 July 2023, 
https://chatgptiseatingtheworld.com/2023/07/14/master-list-of-lawsuits-v-ai-chatgpt-openai-microsoft-meta-
midjourney-other-ai-cos/?fbclid=IwAR3vMv9MIZRWvv1xRcponMYRjo0De7BmOJqiUc7dhn50RPBtI_0-
2wqFT3I.  

Industry”,  Politico,  April 

culture 

“AI 

the 

2023,  

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
of 'Generative AI'.3 Such systems have shown prowess in penning poems, stories, and news pieces; 
crafting melodies; retouching photos; devising video games; and producing paintings and other 
artistic visuals. The recent introduction of expansive text-to-image, text-to-music, and text-to-text 
models,  including  the  likes  of  Dall-E,  Stable  Diffusion,  Midjourney,  Jasper,  Chat  GPT-3,  and 
MusicLM, signifies a pivotal moment in AI's progress, underscoring the immense possibilities in 
AI-fueled creativity. Chat GPT-3, an advanced linguistic generative model, generates responses 
indistinguishable from human interaction based on textual cues. Dall-E, named in homage to both 
WALL-E and Salvador Dalí, crafts visual artworks from succinct text prompts.4 Jasper operates 
akin  to  an  adept  copywriter,  spinning  content  akin  to  seasoned  writers  from  mere  headlines.5 
Innovation like Google's MusicLM, which orchestrates intricate music pieces from textual inputs, 
and ventures like Meta's make-a-video and Google's Imagen video, are constantly evolving.6   

In this context, both cultural and legal spheres are now witnessing clashes between artists, media 
giants, AI developers, and the tech platforms that host them.  Recently, Getty Images has taken 
legal action against Stability AI, the makers of the AI art tool Stable Diffusion, asserting that the 
firm unlawfully utilized and processed countless copyrighted images to hone its software.7 In a 
separate  landmark  lawsuit,  artists  such  as  Sarah  Andersen,  Kelly  McKernan,  and  Karla  Ortiz 
initiated an unprecedented class action for copyright infringement against AI solution providers 
including Stability AI Ltd., Midjourney Inc., and DeviantArt Inc. They contend these entities used 
vast amounts of copyrighted images without acquiring permissions or providing payment to inform 
their AI applications.8 Furthermore, Sarah Silverman, along with other writers, have filed a lawsuit 
against OpenAI and Meta, asserting that AI training breached their copyrights, particularly when 
enabling  users  to  produce  summaries  of  their  literary  works. 9 Meanwhile,  the  U.S.  copyright 

3 See Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on laying down harmonised rules on 
artificial intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) and amending certain Union legislative acts, COM(2021)0206 – C9-
0146/2021 – 2021/0106(COD) (hereafter ‘AI Act’), art 28 b 4 (characterizing this as “foundation models powering 
AI systems, designed to autonomously create content ranging from text and images to audio and video.”) 
4  See  Casey  Newton,  “How  DALL-E  could  power  a  creative  revolution”,  The  Verge,  10  June  2022, 
https://www.theverge.com/23162454/openai-dall-e-image-generation-tool-creative-revolution;  OpenAI,  “DALL·E: 
Creating Images from Text”, OpenAI Blog, 5 January 2021), https://openai.com/blog/dall-e. 
5 See Tom Simonite, ‘The Future of the Web Is Marketing Copy Generated by Algorithms’ (WIRED, April 18 2022) 
<https://www.wired.com/story/ai-generated-marketing-content. 
6  See  Andrea  Agostinelli  et  al,  “MusicLM:  Generating  Music  From  Text@,  Google  Research  (2023) 
https://research.google/pubs/pub52118; Alex Wilkins, “How will AIs that generate videos from text transform media 
online?”,  NewScientist  November  15,  2022,  https://www.newscientist.com/article/2346939-how-will-ais-that-
generate-videos-from-text-transform-media-online. 
7 See James Vincent, “Getty Images is suing Stability AI, creators of popular AI art tool Stable Diffusion, over alleged 
copyright violation”, The Verge, April 2, 2023, https://www.theverge.com. 
8 See Andersen et al v. Stability AI Ltd. et al Andersen et al v. Stability AI Ltd. et al, Docket No. 3:23-cv-00201 (ND 
Cal, 13 January 2023) (Complaint), https://www.courtlistener.com/docket/66732129/andersen-v-stability-ai-ltd. See 
also Karla Ortiz Testimony, Hearing of the U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Intellectual 
Property  (12  July  2023),  https://www.judiciary.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/2023-07-12_pm_-_testimony_-_ortiz.pdf 
(written testimony), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uoCJun7gkbA (video of U.S. Senate subcommittee hearing). 
9 See Sarah Silverman v. OpenAI, Inc., U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California, No. 3:23-cv-03223 
(filed  7  July  2023)  (proposed  class  action)  <https://www.courtlistener.com/docket/67569254/silverman-v-openai-
inc>.  See  also  Paul  Tremblay  and  Mona  Awad  v.  Open  AI,  Inc.,  U.S.  District  Court  for  the  Northern  District  of 
California,  No.  […]  (filed  28  June  2023),  https://copyrightlately.com/pdfviewer/tremblay-v-openai-class-action-
complaint/?auto_viewer=true#page=&zoom=auto&pagemode=none.  

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
office, the District Court of Columbia and other courts in multiple jurisdictions have been asked 
to review the protectability of AI-generated works under the present copyright framework.10 

The justification at the heart of these case is two-fold. On one hand, copyright holders seek to 
maintain  their  influence  over  rapidly  advancing  technologies,  questioning  the  extent  of  their 
control  over  new  tools  that  repurpose  existing  content.  In  addition,  given  AI's  transformative 
potential that might impact the landscape of human labor and disrupt the human role in the creative 
sector, 11 these stakeholders  desire safeguards to  preserve their market  share. Consequently, the 
integration  of  traditional  copyright  systems  with  AI-driven  innovation  is  attracting  significant 
judicial scrutiny globally.12 AI's capability to generate content challenges established principles of 
copyright, authorship, and ownership, prompting pivotal debates over the legitimacy of protecting 
AI-produced works. Beyond the dilemma of recognizing AI as an 'author', courts are grappling 
also with two other intertwined issues: the potential of AI to violate copyright during its learning 
phase, and its  capacity to  produce content that may infringe existing  copyrights.13 This  chapter 
aims  to  thoroughly  explore  these  pressing  concerns,  which  are  currently—and  will  continue  to 
be—presented before courts in multiple jurisdictions, emphasizing their global relevance in the era 
of Generative AI and AI-generated creativity. 

1. RATIONAL: HOLD-OUT POWERS AND MARKET DISRUPTION 

As we embark on an exploration of the burgeoning legal landscape surrounding Generative AI, 
two core justifications for the mounting lawsuits against Generative AI platforms become evident. 
Firstly,  copyright  holders  are  striving  to  retain  their  foothold  in  an  environment  dominated  by 
rapidly progressing technologies. Their primary concern centres around the extent to which they 
can  exert  control  over  these  novel  tools,  particularly  when  these  tools  have  the  capability  to 
repurpose  existing  content  in  unprecedented  ways.  Secondly,  the  undeniable  potential  of  AI  to 
reshape  the  dynamics  of  human  labour  cannot  be  overlooked.  Human  creators  yearn  for 
mechanisms  to  safeguard  their  market  positions  against  the  sweeping  tide  of  machine-driven 
creativity. This part of the chapter sets the stage for understanding these motivations, which are 
driving the wave of litigation against Generative AI platforms. 

10 See infra fn. 113-120. 
11 See e.g. Tyna Eloundou and others, “GPTs are GPTs: An Early Look at the Labor Market Impact Potential of Large 
Language  Models”,    arXiv:2303.10130  [econ.GN]  (2023),  https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.10130  (finding  that  findings 
reveal that around 80% of the U.S. workforce could have at least 10% of their work tasks affected by the introduction 
of LLMs, while approximately 19% of workers may see at least 50% of their tasks impacted). 
12  See  Maria  Iglesias  Portela,  Sharon  Shamuilia  and  Amanda  Anderberg,  “Intellectual  Property  and  Artificial 
Intelligence: A Literature Review”, Joint Research Centre, Publications Office of the European Union (2019). 
13 Please note that his chapter reworks and develops content and conclusions discussed in earlier pieces. See Giancarlo 
Frosio, “Should We Ban Generative AI, Incentivise it or Make it a Medium for Inclusive Creativity?”, in A Research 
Agenda  for  EU  Copyright  Law,  eds.  Enrico  Bonadio  and  Caterina  Sganga  (Edward  Elgar,  forthcoming  2023); 
Giancarlo Frosio, “The Artificial Creatives: the Rise of Combinatorial Creativity from Dall-E to GPT-3”, in Handbook 
of  Artificial  Intelligence  at  Work:  Interconnections  and  Policy  Implications,  eds.  Martha  Garcia-Murillo,  Ian 
MacInnes, and Andrea Renda (Edward Elgar, forthcoming 2023); Giancarlo Frosio, “Four Theories in Search of an 
A(I)uthor” in Research Handbook on Intellectual Property and Artificial Intelligence, ed. Ryan Abbott (Edward Elgar 
2022), 155-177. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
1.1. Hold Out Powers 

In the wave of recent lawsuits against generative AI platforms, we observe a recurring theme: 
copyright  law  wielded  as  a  strategic  instrument  to  secure  or  enhance  market  dominance. 
Historically, the allure of potential hefty statutory damages, especially in the United States, has 
often made litigation a more enticing route than forging business partnerships. This preference is 
further bolstered by the inherent unpredictability of fair use decisions, which can deter newcomers, 
sparking  battles  over  technological  innovations  and,  in  turn,  encouraging  monopolistic 
tendencies.14 This raises important concerns about the historical struggle between copyright and 
innovation. This tension has consistently played out in courts, shaping the landscape of creative 
industries and determining the extent to which emerging technologies can thrive. 

The annals of copyright law reveal a persistent tug-of-war between preservation and progress. 
Throughout history, property owners, particularly within the realm of copyright, have leveraged 
their hold-out power to obstruct progress.15 From early confrontations involving piano rolls,16  tape 
recorders,17 radios,18 and VHS recorders,19 to more contemporary disputes over cable television,20 
peer-to-peer  software, 21  mp3  music  format, 22 search  engines,  digital  thumbnails, 23  and  cloud 
music-storage services, copyright holders have often resisted new technological frontiers. While 
some services like MP3Tunes successfully defended their innovative models,24 others, like ReDigi 
and  Tom  Kabinet, 25 found  themselves  quashed  under  legal  scrutiny,  illustrating  the  ongoing 
friction  between  copyright  proprietors  and  innovators.  The  cases  recently  started  against 
Generative Ai platforms continue illustrating this ongoing tension. 

This historical stance isn't solely about defending rights; it underscores a tactical approach where 
copyright protection is used to dictate the pace and direction of innovation. The murky waters of 
fair use and fair dealing decisions, compounded by the varying interpretations of exceptions and 
limitations, embolden copyright holders in their litigious pursuits. Such a posture can stymie the 

14 See Brian Johnston, “Rethinking Copyright's Treatment Of New Technology: Strategic Obsolescence As A Catalyst 
For  Interest  Group  Compromise”,  NYU  Ann  Surv  Am  L  64  (2008):  165,  fn136;  Robin Moore,  “Fair 
Use and Innovation Policy” NYU L Rev 82 (2007): 944. 
15 See Carol Rose, ‘The Comedy of the Commons: Custom, Commerce, and Inherently Public Property”, U Chi L. 
Rev. 53 (1986): 711, 749-50, 752 (discussing how large public projects such as highways or railroads are vulnerable 
to the hold-out power of single property owners). 
16 See White-Smith Music Publishing Company v Apollo Company 209 US 1 (1908). 
17 See Amstrad Consumer Electronics v The British Phonographic Industry [1988] UKHL 15. 
18 See Twentieth Century Music Corp v Aiken, 422 US 151, 151 (1975). 
19 See Sony Corp of Am v Universal Studios 464 US 417, 429 (1984).  
20 See Fortnightly Corp v United Artists 392 US 390 (1968). 
21 See Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios v Grokster 545 US 913 (2005); A&M Records v Napster 239 F3d 1004 (9th Cir 
2001). 
22 See UMG Recordings v MP3com 92 F Supp 2d 349 (SDNY 2000). 
23 See eg Perfect 10 v Amazon.com 508 F3d 1146 (9th Cir 2007); Vorschaubilder, I ZR 69/08 (Bundesgerichtshof, 29 
April 2010) (ruling that Google Image Search does not Infringe copyright). 
24 See Capitol Records v MP3Tunes 07 Civ 9931 (SDNY 2011). 
25 See Capitol Records v ReDigi 934 F Supp 2d 640 (SDNY 2013); 910 F3d 649 (2d Cir 2018); Case C-263/18 NUV 
v Tom Kabinet EU:C:2019:1111, para 72. See also Reto M Hilty, ‘Exhaustion in the digital age’ in Irene Calboli and 
Edward Lee, Research Handbook on Intellectual Property Exhaustion and Parallel Imports (Edward Elgar 2016) 64, 
72 ff. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
birth and growth of novel technologies and business blueprints, including generative AI. The risk? 
A potential market gap where innovations that might enrich the value of copyrighted content are 
stifled.26 Furthermore, it hints at an evolving narrative where copyright law transitions from merely 
regulating copying to orchestrating technological design itself.27 

Dominant  players  in  the  market  have  consistently  resisted  tech  evolution  to  safeguard  their 
market share.28 In several episodes, these stakeholders wielded their influence to capture a slice of 
the economic boons ushered in by technology, sometimes regardless of any economic loss that 
traditional business models may have suffered as a consequence of innovation. The Google Books 
case  serves  as  a  poignant  illustration.  Here,  a  project  that  could  have  been  a  win-win  for  all 
parties—rightsholders, innovators, and the public—was mired in litigation as stakeholders vied 
for  a  piece  of  the  revenue  pie.  Cases  like  these  underscore  the  potential  pitfalls  of  aggressive 
copyright enforcement, which might thwart projects that can enrich culture, reward innovation, 
and serve public interest. In a landmark decision, the US  Court of Appeals  for the 2nd Circuit 
validated the legitimacy of the original relational database.29  Yet, despite the vast number of books 
cataloged, only select excerpts are accessible. Moreover, this constrained fair use argument might 
not withstand legal scrutiny in many European courts. For instance, a French case highlighted the 
challenges facing projects centered on book digitization for text and data mining.30 A parallel can 
be  drawn  with  the  Sony  case.  At  its  height,  Jack  Valenti,  the  MPAA  President  at  the  time, 
dramatically told Congress, “the VCR is to the American film producer and the American public 
as the Boston Strangler is to the woman home alone.” 31 However, history tells a different tale. The 
video rental sector significantly bolstered the film industry's growth. In both scenarios, innovative 
technologies, which held promise for copyright owners, faced opposition due to perceived threats 
they posed to the copyrighted content market. 

Reflecting on these historical precedents, it's evident that the struggle between copyright and 
innovation  persists  in  the  realm  of  generative  AI.  As  in  the  past,  current  lawsuits  might  see 
rightsholders leveraging their influence to stymie AI's transformative potential, including its ability 
to engender fresh modes of expression. Yet, the unparalleled prowess of AI necessitates a renewed 
focus on safeguarding human creativity. Navigating this balance between stimulating innovation 
and incentivizing creativity remains a central challenge in copyright and innovation discourse, a 
debate that spans over two centuries.  

1.2. Creative Market Disruption 

Legal challenges against AI-generated creativity are on the rise due to concerns about its potential 
upheaval  of  the  creative  industry.  Pioneers  in  AI-generated  music,  like  Tencent  and  Google's 
MusicLM, are prompting debates over AI potentially replacing human composers, especially in 

26 See Fred von Lohmann, “Fair Use as Innovation Policy”, Berkeley Tech L J 23 (2008): 829 (noting that fair use for 
private non-transformative uses should function as an ‘innovation policy’ by incentivizing innovators to develop new 
technologies that enable such copying).  
27 See e.g., Tarleton Gillespie, Wired Shut: Copyright and the Shape of Digital Technology (MIT Press, 2007). 
28 See e.g., White-Smith, 1; Amstrad, 159; Aiken, 151; Sony, 417; Fortnightly, 390; Grokster, 913; Napster, 1004. 
29 See The Authors Guild v Google 804 F3d 202 (2nd Cir 2015).  
30 See Editions du Seuil et autres/Google Inc. et France (TGI Paris, 18 December 2009). 
31 Home  Recording  of  Copyrighted  Works:  Hearings  Before  the  Subcomm  on  Courts,  Civil  Liberties,  and  the 
Administration  of  Justice  of  the  Committee  on  the  Judiciary,  97th  Cong  97  (1982)  (testimony  of  Jack  Valenti), 
http://cryptomeorg/hrcw-hearhtm. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
fields like video games and films.32 While there's some evidence of AI's role in ideation within 
architecture  and  design, 33 substantial  proof  of  its  broad-scale  adoption  remains  elusive. 
Additionally,  while  AI  demonstrates  potential  in  tasks  like  debugging  and  code-writing,  it's 
uncertain whether tools like ChatGPT and AlphaCode will entirely eclipse human programmers.34 
Presently,  AI  creativity  tools  often  necessitate  significant  human  involvement  in  prompt 
engineering, data fine-tuning, and model integration.35 As of today, these tools mainly augment 
rather  than  replace  creative  professionals,  acting  as  supplementary  aids  rather  than  direct 
competitors. However, the discourse around AI in creativity reveals a bifurcation. Some view AI 
as a tool to bolster artistic productivity,36 while others, termed neo-Luddites, resist its integration.37 
The looming concern isn't that AI will entirely supplant human artistry but that it might provide 
cost-effective  alternatives,  appealing  to  the  mass  market  and  satisfactory  for  a  majority  of 
consumers.  Cases  in  point  include  Netflix's  use  of  AI  for  background  art  in  animations38 and 
platforms  like  Soundraw  and  ShutterStock  offering  vast  AI-generated  music  libraries.39 Rachel 
Hill, leader of the Association of Illustrators, acknowledges AI's appeal for budget-conscious art 
directors. 40  Yet,  she  underscores  the  irreplaceable  value  of  human  illustrators,  especially  in 
conceptual stages. This distinction, however, could wane as AI evolves, potentially reducing the 
need for human involvement in creative processes.  

Recently,  issues  have  been  raised  by  AI  apps  like  Dall-E,  Stable  Diffusion,  and  Stability  AI 
generating  outputs  in  the  style  of  famous  artist.  For  example,  a  user  in  the  Stable  Diffusion 
community, complaining about the scarcity of 2D illustration styles, utilized 32 illustrations from 
Hollie Mengert’s portfolio, a well-known illustrator and character designer based in Los Angeles, 
to train Stable Diffusion, replicating her unique style. The outcome was then shared under an open 
license for public use, with her name being used to identify the generated art style; for instance, 

32 See Abner Li, “Google’s MusicLM is rather good at creating music from text descriptions”, 9to5Google, January 
28, 2023, https://9to5google.com/2023/01/28/google-musiclm. 
33 See  e.g.  Ben  Dreith,  “How  AI  software  will  change  architecture  and  design”,  Dezeen,  November  16,  2022, 
https://www.dezeen.com/2022/11/16/ai-design-architecture-product;  Kevin  Roose,  “A.I.-Generated  Art  Is  Already 
Transforming  Creative  Work”,  NYTimes,  October  21,  2022,  https://www.nytimes.com/2022/10/21/technology/ai-
generated-art-jobs-dall-e-2.html.  
34 Davide Castelvecchi, “Are ChatGPT and AlphaCode going to replace programmers?”, Nature, December 8, 2022, 
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-022-04383-z.  
35 See Vasili Shynkarenka, “Don’t dismiss GPT-3/Stable Diffusion use cases if they don’t work right away”, Vasili 
Shynkarenka Blog, December  2, 2022, https://vasilishynkarenka.com/dont-dismiss-ideas-for-gpt-3-stable-diffusion-
use-cases-if-they-dont-work-right-away.  
36  See  Will  Knight,  “When  AI  Makes  Art,  Humans  Supply  the  Creative  Spark”,  Wired,  July  13,  2022,  
https://www.wired.com/story/when-ai-makes-art. 
37 See  Rich  Johnston,  “Comic  Book  Creators  React  To  AI  Artificial  Intelligence  Art  Explosion”,  Bleeding  Cool, 
December  6,  2022,  https://bleedingcool.com/comics/comic-book-creators-react-to-ai-artificial-intelligence-art-
explosion; Matt Growcoot, “Midjourney Founder Admits to Using a ‘Hundred Million’ Images Without Consent”, 
PetaPixel,  December  21,  2022,  https://petapixel.com/2022/12/21/midjourny-founder-admits-to-using-a-hundred-
million-images-without-consent. 
38 See  Benj  Edwards,  “Netflix  stirs  fears  by  using  AI-assisted  background  art  in  short  anime  film”,  ArsTechnica, 
January  2,  2023,  https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2023/02/netflix-taps-ai-image-synthesis-for-
background-art-in-the-dog-and-the-boy.  
39 See Soundraw, https://soundraw.io; ShutterStock, https://www.shutterstock.com/music/search?artist=amper-music.  
40  “We  are  Training  AI  Twice  as  Fast  this  Year  as  Last.  IEEE  Spectrum”,  ENGTalks,  June  30,  2022, 
https://www.enggtalks.com/news/217757/we-re-training-ai-twice-as-fast-this-year-as-last?c=2859.  

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
by prompting “illustration of a princess in the forest, holliemengert artstyle”.41 In Stable Diffusion 
concept library available on the website Hugging Face alone, there are roughly a thousand models 
like that trained on Mengert’s work. These range from styles inspired by classic and contemporary 
Disney  animations  to  those  influenced  by  the  likes  of  Tron:  Legacy  and  Kurzgesagt  videos.42  
Creating and sharing these models is  cost-effective and easily accessible. While Generative AI 
platforms may introduce mechanisms to avoid replicating a specific artist or author's style,43 users 
often discover workarounds to such restrictions. As we will delve into later, it remains a matter of 
debate whether copyright law can address these uses. This is mainly because such uses could be 
considered transformative at their core, and the existing idea-expression dichotomy might preclude 
protection  of  style.  Regardless,  such  developments  are  bound  to  disrupt  the  creative  market, 
potentially leading to legal grievances from disgruntled creatives.  

In  summation,  Future  AI  advancements  might  elevate  the  standards  for  top-tier  creative  roles, 
potentially sidelining many and consolidating the revenue stream from low-skilled creativity in 
the hands of a select few. AI's potential to significantly reshape the creative sectors, particularly 
in graphic design, music, and copywriting, cannot be overlooked. The rapid and potent evolution 
of AI underscores that industry disruptions are imminent. The ability of AI algorithms to generate 
high-quality creative outputs quickly and cost-effectively poses a challenge to human creatives. 
One key factor that amplifies the potential impact of AI is its exponential growth, both in terms of 
capabilities and the speed at which it learns. This ‘singular’ nature of AI development implies that 
disruption in the creative job market is not a matter of if, but when. 

2. CLAIMS: LEARNING, AUTHORING AND INFRINGING  

As we venture further into the age of generative AI, the established paradigms of our Intellectual 
Property (IP) systems, encompassing copyright, trade secrets, and patent law, face unprecedented 
challenges. While our current IP frameworks can secure protections for the software underpinning 
AI  technologies 44 or  computer-assisted  creativity—which  remains  copyrightable  provided  the 
human involvement is original, 45 they grapple with the delineation of rights concerning the input 
used by AI and outputs produced by such AI, where minimal “non-expressive” human interaction 
prompts a machine to conjure its own unique expressions.46 To effectively unpack the evolving 
legal  landscape  of  AI-driven  creativity,  courts  must  address  three  pivotal  concerns.  Beyond 
identifying the AI as an author or “A(I)uthor”, we must tackle the issues surrounding the machine 
as  both  a  “Learner”  and  a  potential  “(A)Infringer”.  These  concerns  delve  into  the  machine's 

41 See Andy Baio, “Invasive Diffusion: How one unwilling illustrator found herself turned into an AI model”, Waxy, 
November 1, 2022, https://waxy.org/2022/11/invasive-diffusion-how-one-unwilling-illustrator-found-herself-turned-
into-an-ai-model.  
42 ibid.  
43 See infra fn. 80. 
44  See  Nathan  Calvin  and  Jade  Leung,  “Who  owns  artificial  intelligence?  A  preliminary  analysis  of  corporate 
intellectual property strategies and why they matter”, University of Oxford’s Future of Humanity Institute (2020), 
https://www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/Patents_-FHI-Working-Paper-Final-.pdf. 
45 See e.g., Robert Denicola, “Ex Machina: Copyright Protection for Computer-Generated Works”, Rutgers University 
Law  Review  69  (2016):  269-270;  Robert  Clark  and  Shane  Smyth  (1997),  Intellectual  Property  Law  in  Ireland, 
Butterworths, Dublin; Payer Components South Africa Ltd v Bovic Gaskins [1995] 33 IPR 407.  
46 A related scenario emerges in the case of works co- or jointly authored, rather than assisted, by human and artificial 
intelligence. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
capacity to  potentially infringe upon existing  copyrighted works during its learning  process, as 
well as its ability to produce outputs that might infringe on copyrights. Both issues ultimately hinge 
on the potential attribution of copyright infringement liabilities to entities that train AI for creative 
generation or those employing AI tools to either assist their own creative process or to generate 
creativity independently.  

In this section, we shall embark on a comprehensive exploration of these pressing issues, dissecting 
the intricate interplay between generative AI and the copyright frameworks, informed by various 
judicial reviews and interpretations. 

2.1. The Machine Learner  

A fundamental aspect of Machine Learning (ML) and various other AI processes is the necessity 
for input data that fuels AI learning and development.47 This reliance on data and extensive data 
processing  is  intrinsic  to  the  essence  of  ML,48 giving  rise  to  significant  questions  concerning 
ownership and legal protections. On one hand, the issue of data ownership emerges as a crucial 
consideration. The development of AI and ML systems typically requires the utilization of large 
datasets  to  enable the continuous refinement of the system's  decision-making  capabilities. This 
leads to a pressing question: Who holds ownership over the datasets employed to train the system? 
Furthermore,  should  Intellectual  Property  Rights  (IPR)  be  extended  to  the  intermediate  data 
generated  by  AI/ML  during  the  training  process?  On  the  other  hand,  and  more  central  to  the 
pending  lawsuits  concerning  Generative  AI,  a  vital  question  surfaces  regarding  the  potential 
copyright infringement that could arise through machine learning. These lawsuits arise inter alia 
from  a  growing  conflict  between  AI  firms  and  content  creators  over  the  use  of  human-created 
images  as  training  data.  Many  AI  firms  argue  that  scraping  images  from  the  web  for  training 
purposes is covered under laws like the US fair use doctrine, while rights holders contend that this 
constitutes  a  copyright  violation.  Our  discussion  will  subsequently  focus  on  unpacking  this 
complex issue, shedding light on the legal intricacies that surround it. 

The legal framework concerning the intersection of machine learning, data mining, and intellectual 
property  rights  presents  a  complicated  landscape.49 Specifically,  there's  a  tension  between  the 

47 See e.g., Olivier Gerber, “Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning - Background Paper”, 50th EPRA Meeting, 
Athens, 
https://www.epra.org/attachments/athens-plenary-2-artificial-intelligence-machine-learning-
2019, 
background-paper 
48 See e.g., Andrea Ottolia, Big Data e Innovazione Computazionale (Giappichelli 2017), 163 ff. 
49 See e.g., Rossana Ducato and Alain Strowel, “Limitations to Text and Data Mining and Consumer Empowerment: 
Making the Case for a Right to ‘‘Machine Legibility’”, International Review of Intellectual Property and Competition 
Law 50(3) (2019): 649-684; Christophe Geiger, Giancarlo Frosio and Oleksander Bulayenko, ‘Text and Data Mining: 
Art.  3  and  4 of  the  Directive  790/2019/EU”  in Los  Derechos  de  autor  en  el  mercado unico  digital  Europeo,  eds. 
Concepción Sáiz García and Raquel Evangelio Llorca (Tirant lo Banch 2019), 27 ff; Bernt Hugenholtz, “The New 
Copyright  Directive:  Text  and  Data  Mining 
(Articles  3  and  4)”,  Kluwer  Copyright  Blog,  2019, 
http://copyrightblog.kluweriplaw.com/2019/07/24/the-new-copyright-directive-text-and-data-mining-articles-3-and-
4; Eleonora Rosati, “Copyright as an Obstacle or an Enabler? A European Perspective on Text and Data Mining and 
Its  Role  in  the  Development  of  AI  Creativity”,  Asia  Pacific  Law  Review,  27  (2019):  198-217;  Andrea  Toth, 
“Algorithmic copyright enforcement and AI: Issues and potential solutions, through the lens of text and data mining”, 
Masaryk University Journal of Law and Technology 13(2) (2019): 361-387; Christophe Geiger, Giancarlo Frosio and 
Oleksander Bulayenko, “Text and Data Mining in the Proposed Copyright Reform: Making the EU Ready for an Age 
of Big Data?” IIC 49(7) (2018): 814-844; Marco Caspers, and Lucie Guibault, Baseline report of policies and barriers 
of TDM in Europe (FutureTDM, 2016), https://project.futuretdm.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/FutureTDM_D3.3-

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
lawful utilization of Text-and-Data-Mining (TDM) techniques and intellectual property protection. 
Machine  learning  techniques,  described  as  algorithms  trained  to  detect  patterns  for  achieving 
specific goals,50 rely heavily on TDM. TDM, is a method to extract information from vast digital 
data through automated software tools,51 involving stages like (1) identification of materials, (2) 
copying  and  pre-processing, 52  (3)  data  extraction,  and  (4)  recombination  to  identify  final 
patterns.53 The friction between IP protection and TDM arises from the fundamental principle that 
copyright  protects  creative  form,  not  the  underlying  data  or  information. 54 Essentially,  TDM 
shouldn't interfere with exclusive IPRs. However, certain activities in TDM may infringe on rights 
provided by copyright and database protection.  

2.1.1. Tension between Copyright Protection and Machine Learning 

TDM typically necessitates some level of copying protected subject matter, a process that might 
bring legal challenges, especially in certain jurisdictions such as the European Union, where even 
the limited copying of an excerpt might be perceived as infringing upon the right of reproduction.55 
However, a distinction exists when TDM tools are designed in such a way that they involve only 
minimal  copying,  perhaps  just  a  few  words,  or  crawl  through  data  while  processing  each  item 
individually.  Such  actions  are  more  defensible,  as  they  steer  clear  of  subject  matters  protected 
either by copyright or sui generis rights, thereby reducing the risk of legal liability.56 Contrarily, 
any act of reproduction within TDM activities that results in the creation of a copy of protected 
work may instigate copyright infringement. Several stages within the TDM process can potentially 
give rise to legal challenges: 

(1) Pre-Processing Stage: Standardizing materials into machine-readable formats might provoke 
an infringement on the right of reproduction.57 Further, the uploading of pre-processed material on 

Jean-Paul  Triaille, 

Baseline-Report-of-Policies-and-Barriers-of-TDM-in-Europe.pdf.; 
Jérôme  De  Meeûs 
D’argenteuil, and Amélie De Francquen, Study of the Legal Framework of Text and Data Mining (TDM) (European 
Commission,  2014),  http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/copyright/docs/studies/1403_study2_en.pdf.  An  essential 
bibliography including literature treating this question can be found at Giancarlo Frosio, “L’(I)Autore inesistente: una 
tesi tecno-giuridica contro la tutela dell’opera generata dall’intelligenza artificiale” AIDA 29 (2020): 52-91, 54, fn. 
13. 
50 European  Commission,  White  paper  on  Artificial  Intelligence  -  A  European  approach  to  excellence  and  trust, 
COM(2020) 65, 16. 
51 See  e.g.,  Jiawei  Han,  Micheline  Kamber,  Jian  Pei,  Data  Mining:  Concept  and  Techniques  (Morgan  Kaufmann, 
2011). 
52 In particular, copying encompasses (a) pre-processing materials by turning them into a machine-readable format 
compatible with the technology to be deployed for the TDM so that structured data can be extracted and (b) possibly, 
but  not  necessarily,  uploading  the  pre-processed  materials  on  a  platform,  depending  on  the  TDM  technique  to be 
deployed. 
53 See  Diane  McDonald  and  Ursulla  Kelly,  “The  Value  and  Benefit  of  Text  Mining  to  UK  Further  and  Higher 
Education. Digital Infrastructure”, JISC (2012), http://bit.ly/jisc-textm; Triaille et al., Study of the Legal Framework 
of Text and Data Mining (TDM), 28; Sholom Weiss, Nitin  Indurkhya, and Tong Zhang, Fundamentals of Predictive 
Text Mining, Texts in Computer Sciences (Springer, 2010), 15. 
54 See e.g., Bernt Hugenholtz, Auteursrecht op informatie (Kluwer, 1989). 
55 See CJEU, C-5/08, Infopaq International A/S v. Danske Dagblades Forening, 16 July 2009, ECLI:EU:C:2009:465, 
paras 54-55. 
56 See Directive 2019/790/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on copyright and related 
rights in the Digital Single Market and amending Directives 96/9/EC and 2001/29/EC, 2019 O.J. L 130, Recital 8 
57 See Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of 
certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the information society, 2000 O.J. L 167, Art. 2 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
a platform could  violate this right, although this might  be contingent  upon whether the chosen 
TDM technique employs specific software for direct data analysis from the source.58 

(2) Pre-Processing for Extraction: In more nuanced circumstances, TDM may also involve various 
alterations  of  a  database  protected  by  copyright,  encompassing  reproduction,  translation, 
adaptation, arrangement, and other changes affecting the original selection and arrangement of the 
database's  content. 59 For  example,  pre-processing  for  extraction  might  necessitate  cleansing  a 
database  of  irrelevant  portions  and  data  for  analysis,  which  could  violate  both  the  right  of 
reproduction and the right to make adaptations and arrangements.60 

(3) Mining Stage: This crucial part of the TDM process, where data is finally extracted, may also 
infringe the right of reproduction, depending upon the character of the extraction and the mining 
software deployed.61  

(4)  Sui  Generis  Database  Rights:  TDM  might  further  infringe  upon  these  rights,  especially 
regarding  the  extraction  (and,  to  a  lesser  degree,  the  re-utilization)  of  substantial  parts  of  a 
database. Here, the violation could occur even without the reproduction of original materials, as 
the extraction itself could infringe upon the exclusive rights bestowed upon the database owner.62 
In emphasizing the legal intricacies involved, the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) 
has elucidated that the act of transferring data from one medium to another and its integration into 
a  new  medium  is  deemed  an  act  of  extraction,  further  complicating  the  landscape  for  TDM 
activities.63  

2.1.2. The Legality of Machine Learning: Exceptions, Limitations, and Fair Uses 

The legality TDM and its potential infringement on intellectual property laws hinge upon varied 
national  approaches,  exceptions,  limitations,  and  interpretations  of  fair  use  in  copyright  law.64 
Exceptions, limitations, and fair uses within copyright law permit the use of copyrighted works 
without a license from the owner, recognizing that such usage may fulfill important public interests 
and fundamental rights, such as freedom of expression.65 In the context of TDM, applying these 

58 See Triaille et al., Study of the Legal Framework of Text and Data Mining (TDM), 28. 
59 See Directive 1996/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection 
of  databases,  1996  O.J.  L  77,  Art.  5(a-b).  See  also  See  also  Irini  Stamatoudi,  “Text  and  Data  Mining”,  in  New 
Developments in EU and International Copyright Law, ed. Irini Stamatoudi (Kluwer Law International, 2016), 264-
265 
60 See Directive 1996/9/EC, Art. 5(a-b). See also Stamatoudi, “Text and Data Mining”, 262; Triaille et al., Study of 
the Legal Framework of Text and Data Mining (TDM), 34. 
61 See Triaille et al., Study of the Legal Framework of Text and Data Mining (TDM), 31. 
62 Directive 1996/9/EC, Art. 7. 
63 Directive 1996/9/EC, Arts. 2(a), 7(1), and 7(2)(b); CJEU, C-203/02, The British Horseracing Board Ltd and Others 
v. William Hill Organization Ltd, 9 November 2004, ECLI:EU:C:2004:695; Stamatoudi, “Text and Data Mining”, 
267. 
64 See Sean Fiil-Flynn et al., “Legal reform to enhance global text and data mining research: Outdated copyright laws 
951-953. 
research”, 
around 
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.add6124.   
65 See Christophe Geiger, “Copyright’s Fundamental Rights Dimension at EU Level”, in Research Handbook on the 
Future of EU Copyright, ed.  Estelle Derclaye (Edward Elgar, 2009), 27. 

378(6623) 

Science, 

(2022): 

hinder 

world 

the 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
principles  can  be  seen  as  promoting  public  interests,  especially  in  the  domains  of  scientific 
advancement and economic development.66 

In  Europe,  several  exceptions  have  been  considered  to  shield  TDM  from  intellectual  property 
infringement. Notable exceptions include temporary acts of reproduction, research, private use, 
normal use of a database, and the extraction of insubstantial parts of a database.67 Despite these 
exceptions,  legal  uncertainties  have  persisted,  leading  to  the  introduction  of  a  specific  TDM 
exception in the Copyright in the Digital Single Market Directive of 2019.68 Unfortunately, this 
exception presents limitations; it can be opted-out by right holders or utilized without restrictions 
solely  by  public  research  institutions  for  research  purposes.69 This  arrangement  disadvantages 
private  AI  industries,  restricting  their  ability  to  freely  employ  TDM  for  machine  learning,  a 
restriction echoed across many civil law jurisdictions.70 

Conversely, countries following common law traditions, such as the US, Canada, UK, Australia, 
and New Zealand, have leveraged opening clauses or fair use models to legitimize TDM.71 In the 
US, for example, TDM's application for training foundational models seems to be protected under 
the fair use doctrine,72  albeit with some narrow limitations.73 Cases like Google Books and Perfect 
10 have strengthened the understanding that using TDM to create search indices or generate data 
insights  constitutes  transformative  fair  use,  thus  supporting  lawful  TDM  practices  under  US 
copyright  law.74 Moreover,  landmark  rulings,  such  as  Baker  v.  Selden  and  subsequent  reverse 
engineering cases,75  further cement the legal position that TDM is likely permissible. The decision 
in Baker v. Selden emphasized that copyright protection is confined to specific expressions and 
not underlying ideas. Thus, protected content can be utilized and copied if it "must necessarily be 
used as an incident to" the use of unprotected materials.76 This ruling can be applied to TDM for 
training Generative AI models, where the focus is on analysis and extraction from large datasets 
without replicating the original copyrighted expression. Additionally, this legal precedent implies 
that the lawful reproduction of protected materials may be possible when mining text and data to 
train Generative AI models, which themselves remain unprotected. However, courts might also 
consider  that  some  authors,  argue  that  fair  use  may  not  protect  expressive  machine  learning 

66 See Joao Pedro Quintais, “Rethinking Normal Exploitation: Enabling Online Limitations in EU Copyright Law”, 
AMI 6 (2017): 197-205. 
67 Geiger, Frosio, and Bulayenko, ‘Text and Data Mining: Art. 3 and 4 of the Directive 790/2019/EU”,31-37 
68 Directive 2019/790/EU, Art. 3 and 4. 
69 ibid 
70 See Fiil-Flynn et al., “Legal reform to enhance global text and data mining research”. 
71 ibid. 
72 See eg Mark Lemley and Bryan Casey, “Fair Learning”, Texas L Rev 99(4) (2021): 743, 743-785.  
73 See Henderson et al, “Foundation  Models and Fair Use”, preprint 1 (2023), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.15715.pdf 
(noting that ‘copyrighted content may be used to build foundation models without incurring liability due to the fair 
use doctrine. However, there is a caveat: If the model produces output that is similar to copyrighted data, particularly 
in scenarios that affect the market of that data, fair use may no longer apply to the output of the model’) (emphasis 
added). 
74  See  The  Authors  Guild,  202;  The  Authors  Guild  v.  HathiTrust,  755  F.3d  87  (2nd  Cir.  2014);  Perfect  10  v 
Amazon.com, 1146; Perfect 10 v Google, 416 F. Supp. 2d 828 (C.D. Cal. 2006). 
75 See e.g., Sega Enterprises Ltd v Accolade, Inc, 977 F. 2d 1510 (9th Cir. 1992); Sony Computer Entertainment v 
Connectix Corp, 203 F. 3d 496 (9th Cir. 2000). 
76 Baker v. Selden, 101 U.S. 99, 104 (1879). 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
applications.77 In  this  context,  I  would  propose  that  Sobel's  distinction  between  non-expressive 
and expressive fair use doesn't compellingly align with the reality of Generative AI. The argument 
here  pivots  on  the  way  expressions  are  deployed  as  input  data  for  training  machine  learning 
models. When these expressions are processed for the purpose of extracting data, the foundational 
models at play do not interact with the protected expressions in any creative or expressive manner. 
Instead, the models utilize this content in a functionally analytic or non-expressive manner, serving 
as building blocks to construct a new, inventive machine that possesses the capability to create an 
endless array of original expressions. The apparent confusion in Sobel's argument likely originates 
from an underlying assumption that the use of input materials in crafting an expressive machine 
necessarily  imbues  that  usage  with  an  expressive  character.  Yet,  this  reasoning  overlooks  the 
subtlety  that  the  utilization  remains  inherently  non-expressive,  corresponding  more  closely  to 
precedents such as the Google Books case. In those instances, it's not the act of using the content 
that is expressive, but rather the novel machine or tool itself that manifests expressiveness. This 
distinction underscores the transformative nature of the process, wherein existing expressions are 
not  simply  repurposed  but  fundamentally  reshaped,  contributing  to  the  creation  of  something 
entirely new. The challenge for courts, then, is to accurately discern the nuances of this interaction. 

2.1.3. Potential policy and judicial approaches to Machine Learning 

In sum, the complex relationship between TDM techniques and copyright law and the legality of 
data  scraping  for  training  Generative  AI  presents  a  multifaceted  and  jurisdiction-dependent 
challenge for courts. First, courts are faced with the task of navigating an intricate legal terrain 
where  they  must  balance  technological  advancements  with  the  protection  of  original  creations. 
This task is further complicated by the rapid evolution of technology and the corresponding lag in 
legal  adaptation.  Second,  the  regulatory  landscape's  diversity  in  governing  TDM  and  machine 
learning creates an unequal playing field, particularly for private AI industries operating within 
jurisdictions with more restrictive laws. While these restrictive approaches undoubtedly fortify the 
rights  of  creators  and  shield  their  market  share  from  encroachment  by  AI  technologies,  they 
simultaneously impose limitations on innovation. Third, this dichotomy is starkly evident in the 
European context, where uncertainty surrounding the permissibility of TDM and AI training has 
significantly impeded the competitive edge of European AI innovators. The risk of legal liabilities 
within the EU, coupled with the ambiguity in interpreting and applying copyright laws to emerging 
technologies,  has  created  a  stifling  environment.  This  state  of  inaction  inadvertently  tilts  the 
balance in favor of jurisdictions like the US, where landmark cases and the application of the fair 
use doctrine create a more favorable ecosystem for innovation.  

In  addressing  these  challenges,  courts  must  be  guided  by  coherent  policy  considerations  that 
recognize the multifaceted nature of the problem. Among these considerations are: encouraging 
innovation with policymaking geared towards fostering an environment that stimulates creativity 
and  innovation  without  eroding  essential  copyright  protections;  international  consistency  with 
efforts made to create some semblance of international alignment to avoid jurisdictional disparities 
that  may  hinder  global  technological  advancement;  and  ethical  considerations  concerning  the 
impact of AI technologies on societal values, cultural heritage, and individual creativity must be 
part of the judicial deliberation.78  

77 See Benjamin Sobel, “Artificial intelligence’s fair use crisis”, Colum. JL & Arts 41 (2017): 45, 45 (emphasis added). 
78 See Joao Pedro Quintais and Nick Diakopoulos, “A Primer and FAQ on Copyright Law and Generative AI for News 
Media”,  Medium,  April  28,  2023,  https://generative-ai-newsroom.com/a-primer-and-faq-on-copyright-law-and-

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
As  courts  grapple  with  these  challenges,  certain  legal  precedents  and  emerging  technologies 
provide  insight  into  how  these  issues  might  be  addressed.  The  Field  v.  Google  decision,  for 
instance, highlights the importance of adherence to technical standards.79 In this case, the fact that 
Field had not employed the “robots.txt” exclusion standard to prevent Google from web crawling 
his site weighed against his copyright claim of infringement by copying his content. This suggests 
that  generative  AI  system  developers  and  deployers  might  be  well-advised  to  adopt  technical 
mitigation strategies to support their fair use claims. Such strategies could align with the broader 
aim of fostering an environment  that stimulates  creativity and innovation without undermining 
essential copyright protections.  

Meanwhile,  innovative  self-help  solutions  are  emerging  as  a  means  of  shielding  artists  from 
potential infringement by AI art generators. An example of this is Glaze, a technology developed 
at the University of Chicago, crafted to protect images from AI art generators that might replicate 
an artist's unique style.80 Artists can employ Glaze to attach 'style cloaks' to their works before 
publishing them online. These almost imperceptible changes are intended to mislead generative 
AI models that might attempt to mimic the artist's style, effectively causing the AI to associate the 
artwork  with  something  unrelated.  To  assess  the  efficiency  and  applicability  of  the  'glazing' 
process, the developers of Glaze have worked with more than 1,100 professional artists, testing it 
on various  works.  Among them is  Karla Ortiz, one of the plaintiffs in  a  recent lawsuit against 
Stability AI, Midjourney, and DeviantArt. This method, however, may face challenges from future 
neural networks capable of recognizing and removing the 'glaze,' much like current technologies 
can detect and erase watermarks. Courts might conclude that developing AI that circumvents self-
help solutions might weigh in favour of a copyright infringement claim.  

Finally, there are legislative initiatives aimed at increasing transparency in the use of copyrighted 
material  within  Generative  AI  processes.  Specifically,  the  AI  Act  proposed  by  the  European 
Commission  mandates  that  providers  of  Generative  AI  disclose  a  detailed  summary  of  how 
copyrighted training data is utilized.81 It's important to note that this disclosure requirement does 
not absolve the AI providers from potential legal liabilities. The proposed legislation explicitly 
states that this obligation exists “without prejudice to Union or national or Union legislation on 
copyright”.82 Nevertheless, courts may take into account whether this transparency obligation has 
been fulfilled when determining the final outcome of potential infringement cases. Additionally, 
such disclosure obligations could pave the way for creators to exercise an opt-out option, thereby 
establishing a market for their works to be used in training generative AI models.83 Companies 
like Stability AI have already started to incorporate opt-out provisions, allowing content creators 
and artists to exclude their works from the next version of their product, Stable Diffusion.84 In a 

generative-ai-for-news-media-f1349f514883  (listing  a  number  of  ethical  and  responsible  uses  that  should  be 
nonetheless warranted even if generative AI models are permitted under copyright law). 
79 See Field v. Google, Inc., 412 F. Supp. 2d 1106 (D. Nev. 2006). 
80 See Shawn Shan et al, “Glaze: Protecting Artists from Style Mimicry by Text-to-Image Models”, arXiv:2302.04222 
[cs.CR] (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04222. 
81 See AI Act, art 28 b 4 c). 
82 ibid. 
83 See Quintais and Diakopoulos, “A Primer and FAQ on Copyright Law and Generative AI for News Media”. 
84 See e.g., Benj Edwards, “Stability AI plans to let artists opt out of Stable Diffusion 3 image training”, ArsTechnica, 
December 12, 2022, https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2022/12/stability-ai-plans-to-let-artists-opt-out-
of-stable-diffusion-3-image-training.  

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
recent public statement, the CEO of Stability AI asserted that the training datasets they use are 
“ethically, morally, and legally sourced and used”, while acknowledging dissenting opinions by 
adding, “[s]ome folks disagree so we are doing opt out and alternate datasets/models that are fully 
cc”.85 Courts may consider these opt-out mechanisms in their legal reasoning, possibly introducing 
the concept of implied licenses to adjudicate on infringement cases. As such, once these opt-out 
mechanisms gain widespread acceptance, they could potentially set a legal standard that influences 
judicial outcomes. 

2.2. The A(I)uthor 

The inquiry into the A(I)uthor, or the concept of a machine as an author, sets forth the pressing 
question of whether AI-generated creativity can be sheltered under the existing fabric of copyright 
law.  Delving  into  this  issue  necessitates  an  examination  of  two  central  prerequisites  for  the 
copyright protection of creative works: authorship and originality.86 As mentioned earlier, current 
intellectual property regimes, including copyright law, trade secrets, and patent law, already offer 
protections to the foundational software underlying AI technology. However, a distinct challenge 
emerges  when  considering  the  actual  creative  output  generated  by  AI,  for  the  legal  safeguards 
afforded  to  the  software  do  not  readily  translate  to  this  innovative  domain.  A  report  from  the 
European  Commission  candidly  illustrates  the  dilemma,  observing  that  the  'protection  of  AI-
generated  works  [...]  seems  to  be  [...]  problematic'  within  the  existing  legal  framework.87 This 
complexity arises, in part, from the 'humanist approach' ingrained in copyright law, leading to a 
contentious debate over whether AI-created works truly merit copyright protection at all.88 In the 
sections  that  follow,  we  will  delve  deeper  into  the  complex  interplay  between  the  notions  of 
authorship and originality as they relate to creativity generated by artificial intelligence. We will 
explore why these concepts, as currently understood, may pose obstacles to extending copyright 
protections to AI-generated works.89 

2.2.1. Authorship 

The exploration into the copyright protectability of AI-generated creativity must first address a 
fundamental  question:  does the concept  of an  author, according to  traditional copyright norms, 

85

 See 

Emad 

Mostaque 

(@EMostaque), 

Twitter, 

January 

15, 

2023, 

https://twitter.com/EMostaque/status/1614437223323111425.  
86 Alongside the matters of authorship and originality, there exists a tangential but significant question concerning the 
legal personality of machines generating work. This complex issue, though closely related, falls outside the scope of 
our discussions in this chapter. See e.g., Frosio, “Four Theories”, 159-161. 
87 Massimo Craglia et al., Artificial Intelligence: A European Perspective (Joint Research Centre, Publications Office 
of the European Union, 2018), 67, https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/bitstream/JRC113826/ai-flagship-
report-online.pdf. 
88 ibid 68. 
89 Actually, mindful of this legal framework, Dall-E and other Generative AI programs do not claim copyright of the 
works generated by users via their platforms and grant users ‘full usage rights to commercialize the images they create 
[with DALL·E], including the right to reprint, sell, and merchandise’ See e.g. ‘New OpenAI Art Program Does not 
Claim Copyright for AI”, Mind Matters, July 22, 2022, https://mindmatters.ai/2022/07/new-openai-art-program-does-
not-claim-copyright-for-ai;  Sarang  Sheth,  “Who  Owns  AI-Generated  Content?  Understanding  Ownership, 
Copyrighting,  And  How  The  Law 
Interprets  AI-Generated  Art”,  Yanko  Design,  May  27,  2023, 
https://www.yankodesign.com/2023/05/27/who-owns-ai-generated-content-understanding-ownership-copyrighting-
and-how-the-law-interprets-ai-generated-art 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
inherently necessitate a human creator? In other words, can an AI be recognized as an author within 
the legal frameworks that govern copyright?  

2.2.1.1. The International Perspective 

While international treaties remain largely silent on providing a concrete definition of an author, 
there are subtle cues within the text of the Berne Convention that may effectively bar AI from 
being included within the traditional understanding of an author. A couple of key points elucidate 
this contention. Firstly, the term of protection in copyright law, being intricately tied to the life of 
the  author,  becomes  an  incompatible  concept  when  attempting  to  apply  it  to  machines.90 How 
could  one  reconcile  the  finite  lifespan  of  a  human  with  the  indefinite  existence  of  a  machine? 
Secondly, the references made to the nationality or residence of the author within legal documents 
further imply a human-centric understanding.91 This framework seems inherently skewed towards 
human agents, suggesting a deliberate exclusion of non-human entities from the legal definition of 
authorship. Cumulatively, these elements give rise to a compelling argument. As has been stated, 
the  “humanist  cast”  of  Berne,  coupled  with  its  underlying  deference  to  personality  theories, 
robustly  supports  the  “human-centered  notion  of  authorship  presently  enshrined  in  the  Berne 
Convention”.92 This interpretation, by its very essence, would exclude non-human authorship—
including that of AI—from the scope of Berne's protections. 

2.2.1.2. The EU Perspective 

In exploring the concept of a machine as an author within the European Union, the EU's stance 
seems to align with an anthropocentric view, where authorship is firmly rooted in human creation, 
even when technical aids are employed.93 While EU statutory law doesn't provide a cross-cutting 
definition  of  authorship,  significant  directives  and  legal  insights  underscore  the  human-centric 
approach. Both Article 2(1) of the Software Directive and Article 4(1) of the Database Directive 
define an author as a natural person, a group of persons, or a legal person, reinforcing the human 
element in authorship.94 The preparatory works (travaux préparatoires) for these directives further 

90 Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, Art. 7  
91 ibid, Art. 3 
92 See Jane Ginsburg, “People Not Machines: Authorship and What It Means in the Berne Convention”, Int’l Rev. of 
Intell. Prop. and Comp. L. 49 (2018): 131, 134-135; Sam Ricketson, “People or machines? The Berne Convention 
and the changing concept of authorship”, Columbia VLA Journal of Law & the Arts 16 (1992): 1, 34. See also Tanya 
Aplin  and  Giulia  Pasqualetto,  “Artificial  Intelligence  and  Copyright  Protection”  in  Regulating  Industrial  Internet 
Through IPR, Data Protection and Competition Law, eds. Rosa Maria Ballardini, Petri Kuoppamäki and Olli Pitkänen, 
(Kluwer Law International, 2019), §5.04. 
93 See e.g., Bernt Hugenholtz and Joao Pedro Quintais, “Copyright and Artificial Creation: Does EU Copyright Law 
Protect AI-Assisted Output?” IIC - International Review of Intellectual Property and Competition Law 52 (2021): 
1190 (mentioning that “although EU copyright law nowhere expressly states that copyright requires a human creator, 
its ‘anthropocentric’ focus (on human authorship) is self- evident in many aspects of the law”). See also e.g., Frosio, 
“Four Theories”, 162-163; Jean-Marc Deltorn and Franck Macrez, “Authorship in the Age of Machine Learning and 
Artificial 
22-23, 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3261329;  Jean-Marc  Deltorn,  “Deep  Creations:  Intellectual 
8, 
in 
Property 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fdigh.2017.00003/full. 
94 See Directive 2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the legal protection 
of computer programs, O.J. L111/16; Directive 96/9/EC. 

Intelligence”, 

Automata”, 

Humanities 

Frontiers 

Research 

2018-10 

(2018): 

(2017): 

Digital 

CEIPI 

Paper 

and 

No 

the 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
emphasize this human-centered notion, referring explicitly to “the human author who creates the 
work” and affirming that the natural person retains the unalienable rights to claim paternity of their 
work.95 The original proposal for the Software Directive stated that despite the decreasing human 
input in machine-generated programs, a human “author” must always be present and possess the 
right to claim “authorship”.96 This viewpoint was reiterated in the Court of Justice of the European 
Union  (CJEU)  Painer  case,  where  Advocate  General  Trstenjak  stressed  that  protection  applies 
solely to human creations, including those employing technical aids such as a camera. 97 

National legislation within the EU further corroborates this perspective. For instance, Article 
L.111-1  of  the  French  Intellectual  Property  Code  necessitates  that  a  copyrightable  work  be  a 
"creation of the mind";98 Article 5 of the Spanish Copyright Act plainly defines the author as the 
natural  person  who  creates  the  work; 99   and  Article  11  of  the  German  Copyright  Act  aligns 
authorship with a personality approach, safeguarding “the author in his intellectual and personal 
relationships  to  the  work”. 100 Moreover,  EU  law  and  several  national  legislations  bolster  the 
human-centric perspective by instituting a presumption of authorship for the person named in the 
work, barring evidence to the contrary. 101 

In sum, the EU's legal framework and jurisprudence largely support an anthropocentric vision 
of authorship, excluding non-human creations such as those generated by AI. This stance resonates 
through various legal instruments and cases, illustrating a consistent approach across the EU that 
appears  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  recognizing  a  machine  as  an  author  under  the  current 
copyright regime. 

2.2.1.3. The US Perspective 

The United States legal framework provides scant accommodation for the notion of machine or 
non-human authorship  in  the context of copyright law. While the U.S. Copyright Act  does not 
explicitly define “author”, some legal analysts have suggested that the text of the law does not 
necessarily  restrict  authorship  to  human  beings. 102    However,  both  supplementary  textual 

95 See Ana Ramalho, “Will Robots Rule the (Artistic) World? A Proposed Model for the Legal Status of Creations by 
Artificial Intelligence Systems”, 21 J. of Internet L. (2017): 12, 17-18. 
96 See European Commission, “Explanatory Memorandum to the proposal for a Software Directive” COM (88) 816 
final, 21. 
97 CJEU, C-145/10, Eva-Maria Painer v. Standard VerlagsGmbH [2011] ECR I-12533, Opinion of the AG Trstenjak 
2011, para 121 
98  Loi 92-597 du 1er juillet 1992, Code de la propriété intellectuelle, L111-1 (France) (hereafter ‘French IP Code’). 
99   Real  Decreto  Legislativo  (RDL)  1/1996,  de  12 de  abril, por  el que  se  aprueba  el  texto  refundido  de  la  Ley  de 
Propiedad Intelectual, regularizando, aclarando y armonizando las disposiciones legales vigentes sobre la  materia, 
BOE-A-1996-8930, art 5 (Spain) (hereafter ‘Spanish IP Law). 
100  G. v. 09.09.1965, Gesetz über Urheberrecht und verwandte Schutzrechte (Urheberrechtsgesetz – UrhG), art 7 and 
11 (Germany). 
101 Directive  2004/48/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of the  Council  of  29  April  2004  on  the  enforcement  of 
intellectual property rights, O.J. L195/16, Art. 5 
102 See  Denicola,  “Ex  Machina”,  275-283;  Annemarie  Bridy,  “Coding  Creativity:  Copyright  and  the  Artificially 
Intelligent Author”, Stanford Technology L Rev 5 (2012): 1, ¶49; Arthur Miller, “Copyright Protection for Computer 
Programs,  Databases,  and  Computer-Generated  Works:  Is  Anything  New  Since  CONTU?”  Harvard  L.  Rev.  106 
(1993):  977,  1042-1072;  Pamela  Samuelson,  “Allocating  Ownership  Rights  in  Computer-Generated  Works” 
University of Pittsburgh L. Rev. 47(4) (1986): 1185, 1200-1205. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
references within the statute and a body of case law predominantly indicate that only humans can 
be  authors  under  the  current  law.  Specifically,  Section  101  of  the  Copyright  Act  characterizes 
anonymous  works  as  those  “where  no  natural  person  is  identified  as  an  author”, 103 implicitly 
leaning towards a human-centric definition of authorship. This aligns with a longstanding legal 
understanding, backed by U.S. courts, that copyright, as conceived constitutionally, pertains solely 
to human authors.104  

The  U.S.  Supreme  Court  has  consistently  reinforced  this  viewpoint  by  plainly  stating,  for 
instance, that “[a]s a general rule, the author is […] the person who translates an idea into a fixed, 
tangible  expression  entitled  to  copyright  protection”.105 In  Feist  v.  Rural,  the  court  extensively 
examined the concepts of authorship and originality, linking them to intrinsically human qualities 
like “creative spark” and “intellectual production”.106 Earlier judicial decisions have supported this 
human-exclusive  approach  to  copyright  as  well,  emphasizing  that  it  protects  “the  fruits  of 
intellectual labor” stemming from “the creative powers of the mind”,107 and that copyright law is 
limited to “original intellectual conceptions of the author”.108  

the case of Naruto v. Slater questioned whether a monkey could hold copyright over selfies it 
had taken. The District  Court dismissed the case, stating  that nonhuman animals  lack statutory 
standing under the Copyright Act. Even though the case was settled, the Court of Appeals upheld 
the lower court's decision, arguing that the language used in the Copyright Act implies authorship 
is a human prerogative. 

Further solidifying this position, Naruto v. Slater served as a practical test of these principles. 
In  this  case,  a  monkey  named  Naruto  took  selfies,  which  were  subsequently  published  by 
photographer David Slater in a book by Blurb Inc., attributing copyright ownership to Slater and 
Wildlife Personalities Ltd.. In 2015, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) filed a 
lawsuit claiming copyright infringement on Naruto's behalf. This case presented an opportunity 
for the court to examine if a non-human animal, in this case Naruto, could hold a copyright. The 
District  Court  dismissed  the  case,  stating  that  non-human  animals  lack  the  statutory  standing 
required under the Copyright Act.109   The court  further stated that  if people acting on  Naruto's 
behalf wanted to argue for animal copyright, they should take the issue up with Congress, not the 
federal  judiciary. 110 The  decision  was  later  appealed,  and  even  though  the  parties  reached  a 
settlement, the Court of Appeals chose not to dismiss the case, instead upholding the lower court's 
ruling. The Appeals Court reasoned that the language of the Copyright Act, specifically words like 

103 17 U.S.C. § 101. 
104 See Atilla Kasap, “Copyright and Creative Artificial Intelligence (AI) Systems: A Twenty-First Century Approach 
to Authorship of AI-Generated Works in the United States”, Wake Forest Intell. Prop. L. J. 19(4) (2019): 335, 358; 
Ralph Clifford,  “Intellectual Property in the Era of the Creative  Computer Program: Will the True Creator Please 
Stand up”, Tulane L. Rev. 71 (1996): 1675, 1682-1686; Timothy Butler, “Can a computer be an author? Copyright 
aspects of artificial intelligence”, (Comm/Ent), A J. of Communications and Entertainment L. 4(4) (1981): 707, 733-
734; Karl Milde, “Can a Computer Be an “Author” or an “Inventor”?”, J. of the Patent Office Soc’y 51 (1969): 378, 
391-392. 
105 Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid (1989) 490 U.S. 730, 737. 
106 Feist Publications v. Rural Telephone Service (1990) 499 U.S. 340, 345, 347. 
107 Trade-Mark Cases (1879) 100 U.S. 82, 94. 
108 Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony (1884) 111 U.S. 53, 58. 
109 Naruto v. David Slater 15-cv-04324-WHO (2016) 
110 ibid.  

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
"children,"  "grandchildren,"  "legitimate,"  "widow,"  and  "widower,"  implies  that  copyright 
protections do not extend to entities that neither marry nor have legally recognized heirs.111  

 The implications of this ruling can logically be extended to include  any non-human and AI-
generated creative works. In this regard, adding administrative weight to this judicial view, the 
Third Edition of the Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices has explicitly excluded non-
human  authorship. 112  The  guidance,  though  non-binding,  states  that  copyright  registration  is 
limited to works created by human beings, reaffirming previous court rulings. More specifically, 
under  Section  306,  ‘The  Human  Authorship  Requirement’  limits  registration  to  ‘original 
intellectual conceptions of the author’ created by a human being. Section 313.2 of the compendium 
clarifies that works created by nature, animals, machines, or through mechanical processes without 
human intervention are not subject to copyright protection. 

In at  least  two instances already, the US  Copyright Office has  rejected registration of comic 
books apparently generated via AI, as in the case of Zarya of the Dawn created by Kris Kashtanova 
via Midjourney and Stephen Thaler’s AI-generated painting, “A Recent Entrance to Paradise”.113In 
the  language  used  in  the  letter  regarding  “Zarya  of  the  Dawn”,  the  U.S.  Copyright  Office  has 
clarified his position in more detail. The images were generated by the AI system Midjourney, 
while the arrangement of images, selection, and accompanying text were created by Kashtanova. 
The Copyright Office granted copyright protection for the text and the compilation, but not for the 
AI-generated images. First, the Office emphasises human creativity, as seen in the references to 
the  Urantia  court  case,  which  established  that  copyright  laws  are  intended  to  protect  creations 
involving human creativity.114 The letter states that the images generated by Midjourney are not 
original works of authorship protected by copyright, as they are produced by a machine without 
any creative input or intervention from a human author.115 Second, the letter also highlights the 
issue of control and the difference between AI-generated works and other computer-based tools 
such as Adobe Photoshop, which artists control and guide to create their desired images. It argues 
that users of Midjourney do not have comparable control over the initial image generated, or any 
final image.116 Instead, “rather than a tool that Ms. Kashtanova controlled and guided to reach her 
desired image, Midjourney generates images in an unpredictable way”.117 As a result, the letter 
concludes that users of Midjourney are not considered “authors” for copyright purposes. Finally, 
the analogy to a commissioned work of art in the letter further supports the Copyright Office's 

111 Naruto v. David Slater, F.3d 418, 426 (9th Cir, 2018). 
112 U.S.  Copyright  Office,  ‘Compendium  of  U.S.  Copyright  Office  Practices’  (3rd  edn,  U.S.  Copyright  Office), 
https://www.copyright.gov/comp3/comp-index.html. 
113 See U. S. Copyright Office, Letter to Mr. Van Lindberg re  Zarya of the Dawn (Registration # VAu001480196), 
February  21,  2023,  https://drive.google.com/file/d/1EK7jKVqRz_GP0kJPzOZY_HqKW0n2ML6c/view;  U.S. 
Copyright Office, Letter to Ryan Abbott Re “Second Request for Reconsideration for Refusal to Register a Recent 
Entrance  to  Paradise”,  February  14,  2022,  https://www.copyright.gov/rulings-filings/review-board/docs/a-recent-
entrance-to-paradise.pdf.  
114 See  Urantia  Found.  v.  Kristen  Maaherra,  114  F.3d  955,  957–59  (9th  Cir.  1997)  (holding  that  “some  element 
of human  creativity must  have  occurred  in order  for  the  Book  to  be  copyrightable”  because  “it  is  not creations of 
divine beings that the copyright laws were intended to protect”) (emphasis added). 
115 See U. S. Copyright Office, Letter to Mr. Van Lindberg,  
116 ibid., 9. 
117 ibid. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
position.118 It argues that if an individual commissioned a visual artist to create an image based on 
certain  guidelines,  the  individual  would  not  be  considered  the  author  of  that  image,  unless  it 
qualified  as  a  work  made  for  hire.  The  author  would  be  the  visual  artist  who  received  those 
instructions  and determined how to  express  them. In  a new  “Copyright  Registration Guidance: 
Works  Containing  Material  Generated  by  Artificial  Intelligence”,  the  U.S.  Copyright  Office 
crystalizes further the position of the Kashtanova letter by clarifying the copyright status of human 
arrangement and compilation of AI-generated creativity: 

A human may select or arrange AI-generated material in a sufficiently creative way that “the 
resulting  work  as  a  whole  constitutes  an  original  work  of  authorship.”  Or  an  artist  may 
modify  material  originally  generated  by  AI  technology  to  such  a  degree  that  the 
modifications meet the standard for copyright protection. In these cases, copyright will only 
protect the human-authored aspects of the work, which are independent of and do not affect 
the copyright status of the AI-generated material itself.119 

On  August  18,  2023,  the  U.S.  District  Court  for  the  District  of  Columbia,  upheld  in  Thaler  v. 
Perlmutter the U.S. Copyright Office's stance that works created entirely by AI are not eligible for 
copyright  protection. 120  The  case  involved  AI  scientist  Stephen  Thaler,  who  had  repeatedly 
attempted to register a visual art piece titled “A Recent Entrance to Paradise” produced by an AI 
system  he  created,  known  as  the  “Creativity  Machine”.  Thaler  argued  that  he  should  own  the 
copyright to the artwork under various legal theories, including the work-for-hire doctrine.121 He 
also  challenged  the  Copyright  Office's  “human  authorship”  requirement,  advocating  for  AI 
systems to be recognized as authors when traditional authorship criteria are met, with copyright 
ownership  then  transferring  to  the  AI's  owner.122 However,  the  court  sided  with  the  Copyright 
Office, stressing that “human authorship is a bedrock requirement of copyright”.123 The judgment 
leaves open questions about the extent of human involvement required for copyright protection, 
suggesting that future cases may further clarify this issue as AI technology and creative practices 
continue to evolve. 

2.2.1.4. The Chinese Perspective 

China  stands  out  as  one  of  the  few  jurisdictions,  and  notably  the  first,  where  courts  have 
specifically addressed the issue of copyright eligibility for AI-generated creativity. One notable 
case is Beijing Feilin Law Firm v. Baidu Corporation, where the Beijing Internet Court ruled that 
works  solely  created  by  machines  are  not  eligible  for  copyright  protection,  emphasizing  the 
necessity of human involvement for such rights.124 The case revolved around a report disseminated 

118 ibid., 10. 
119 U.S.  Copyright  Office,  Copyright  Registration  Guidance:  Works  Containing  Material  Generated  by  Artificial 
Intelligence, 88 FR 16190, 16192-93, March 16, 2023, https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/03/16/2023-
05321/copyright-registration-guidance-works-containing-material-generated-by-artificial-intelligence,  
120 See Stephen Thaler v. Shira Perlmutter, Register of Copyrights and Director of the United States Copyright Office, 
et al., No. 22-cv-1564 (BAH) (D.D.C. 2023), https://ecf.dcd.uscourts.gov/cgi-bin/show_public_doc?2022cv1564-24. 
121 ibid., 7, 14. 
122 ibid., 3. 
123 ibid., 8. 
124 Beijing Feilin Law Firm v Baidu Corporation (26 April 2019) Beijing Internet Court, (2018) Beijing 0491 Minchu 
No. 239; Kan He, “Feilin v. Baidu: Beijing Internet Court tackles protection of AI/software-generated work and holds 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
by  a  Beijing  law  firm  through  its  official  WeChat  account.  When  an  anonymous  internet  user 
shared the report without authorization, the law firm filed a copyright infringement lawsuit. The 
contested  report  was  created  using  Wolters  Kluwer  China  Law  &  Reference,  a  legal  research 
software. While the law firm argued that the software merely assisted in the report's creation, the 
defendants countered that the software generated the entire report autonomously. To resolve this, 
a report auto-generated by the software—based on keywords provided by the plaintiff's lawyer—
was compared to the report in question. The two reports were found to be substantially different, 
indicating human input in the law firm's report, thus making it eligible for copyright protection 
under Chinese law. Beyond this specific instance, the court also weighed in on the broader issue 
of AI-generated works. It asserted that the concept of authorship, to be protected under copyright 
law, requires a work to be originated by a human. The court did, however, express the belief that 
users of creative software should receive some form of protection to encourage the purchase and 
utilization of such software for generating and disseminating works.125 The judgment, however, 
stopped short of providing any detailed guidance or recommendations on this particular aspect. 

In  a  subsequent  case,  Shenzen  Tencent  v  Yinxun,  the  Nanshan  District  Court  in  Shenzhen 
effectively affirmed the earlier Beijing ruling, emphasizing the necessity of human involvement 
for copyright protection rather than recognizing solely machine-generated creativity.126 Tencent 
Technology  had  developed  an  AI-based  writing  assistant  called  Dreamwriter.  In  August  2018, 
Tencent posted an article on its website credited to Dreamwriter, making it clear that the article 
was the product of their AI technology. The Defendant later republished this article online without 
Tencent's authorization. In the ensuing copyright infringement lawsuit, Tencent contended that the 
article was crafted under its oversight, asserting that the company was accountable for its creation 
and any resultant liabilities. The court sided with Tencent, stating that the article qualified as an 
original  literary  work.  This  was  because  the  content  emerged  from  the  data  inputs,  triggering 
conditions, and the template and resource configurations chosen by Tencent's operational team. 
Given that the article's expression was shaped by the deliberate choices and arrangements made 
by Tencent’s human team, the court deemed the AI-generated article as a "work for hire" under 
Article  11  of  the  Chinese  Copyright  Law.  The  defendant  was  thus  found  liable  for  copyright 
infringement. Although the court could have interpreted the article as a collaborative intellectual 
effort  between  human  input  and  Dreamwriter's  operations,  the  legal  protection  was  explicitly 
anchored in the contributions made by the human team rather than the AI system. 

2.2.2. Originality 

Setting aside the human-centric understanding of authorship, the very notion of originality acts 
as  an  obstacle  to  granting  copyright  protection  for  creativity  generated  by  AI.  Legal  texts  and 
precedents generally define originality through an anthropocentric lens, focusing on attributes like 
self-consciousness. Most legal jurisdictions adopt what is known as a "personality approach" to 
originality,  viewing  an  original  work  as  an  extension  or  expression  of  the  author's  own 

copyright  only  vests 

in  works  by  human 

that 
IPKat,  November  9,  2019, 
http://ipkitten.blogspot.com/2019/11/feilin-v-baidu-beijing-internet-court.html;  Ming  Chen,  “Beijing  Internet  Court 
denies copyright to works created solely by artificial intelligence” JIPLP 14(8) (2019): 593.  
125 Rather than the software developer who is already rewarded by a copyright over the software. ibid 
126 See Shenzhen Tencent v. Yinxun, Nanshan District People's Court of Shenzhen, Guangdong Province [2019] No. 
14010,  https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/jjv7aYT5wDBIdTVWXV6rdQ.  See  also  Kan  He,  “Another  decision  on  AI-
generated works in China: Is it a work of legal entities?”, The IPKat, January 29, 2020. 

authors”,  The 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
personality.127 This  modern  understanding  has  largely  marginalized  older  views  that  supported 
'sweat of the brow' doctrines, which awarded copyright based on the skill, labor, and effort invested 
in creating a work, irrespective of whether it embodied the author's personality.128 Consequently, 
the  notion  of  originality,  framed  as  an  expression  of  self-  consciousness  or  individuality,  is 
theoretically inaccessible to machine-generated creations.129  

In  the  European  Union,  the  concept  of  originality  has  been  harmonised  through  three  key 
Directives: the Software, Term, and Database Directive. These directives state that a work qualifies 
as original if it represents “the author’s own intellectual creation”.130 The Court of Justice of the 
European Union (CJEU) subsequently broadened this harmonised concept to encompass all types 
of  copyrighted  material.  In  the  Infopaq  case,  the  CJEU  articulated  that  originality  is  expressed 
"through the choice, sequence, and combination of words," allowing the author to manifest their 
creativity uniquely.131 Further clarifying the notion, the Eva-Maria Painer decision stated that a 
work is deemed original—and thus eligible for protection—if it meets three criteria: it must be an 
intellectual creation of the author; it must reflect the author's personality; and it must demonstrate 
the author's free and creative choices in its production.132 These choices provide the work with the 
author's unique “personal touch”. 133 Finally, in the Football Dataco case, the CJEU eliminated 
any lingering support for the "sweat of the brow" doctrine, emphasizing that sheer labor and skill 
on  the  part  of  the  author  are  insufficient  for  copyright  protection  unless  they  exhibit  genuine 
originality.134 

In  the  United  States,  the  prevailing  approach  to  defining  originality  in  copyright  law  is  also 
rooted in the “personality theory”, which considers a work to be original if it reflects the creative 
choices of the author and thereby captures their individual personality,135 “such as the final product 
duplicates his conceptions and visions” of what the work should be.136 Seminal cases like Burrow-
Giles v. Sarony established that originality emanates from the author's unique creative insights, 
referring  to  photographs  as  copyrightable  when  originating  from  the  photographer’s  “unique 
mental  conception”.137 Subsequently,  the  Feist  v.  Rural  decision  clarified  that  mere  labor  and 
effort in crafting a work are insufficient criteria for copyright protection; the work must exhibit a 

127 This  characterization  of  originality  builds  upon  Idealist  personality  theories,  according  to  which  intellectual 
products are manifestations or extensions of the personalities of their creators. See Frosio, “Four Theories”, 158-159. 
128 See e.g., International News Service v Associated Press 248 U.S. 215 (1918); Jeweler's Circular Publishing Co. v 
Keystone Publishing Co. 281 F. 83, 88 (2nd Cir. 1922); Andreas Rahmatian, “Originality in UK Copyright Law: the 
Old ‘‘Skill and Labour’’ Doctrine Under Pressure”, 44 IIC, (2013): 4–34. 
129 The word author itself would bear this meaning on its face as the most accredited etymology of the word would 
have it deriving from the ancient Greek “αὐτός”, which means “self”. See Giancarlo Frosio, Reconciling Copyright 
with Cumulative Creativity: The Third Paradigm (Edward Elgar, 2018), 16. 
130 Respectively, Article 1(3), Article 6, and Article 3(1). For a discussion, see Eleonora Rosati,  Originality in EU 
Copyright - Full Harmonization through Case Law (Edward Elgar, 2013). 
131 CJEU, C-5/08 Infopaq, para 45. 
132 CJEU, C-145/10 Eva Maria Painer, para 94. 
133 ibid para 92. 
134 CJEU, C-604/10, Football Dataco Ltd and Others v Yahoo! UK Ltd and Others, 2012, ECLI:EU:C:2012:115, para 
42. 
135 See Burrow-Giles Lithographic, 60-61 (considering the copyrightability of a portrait photograph of Oscar Wilde).  
136 Lindsay v The Wrecked and Abandoned Vessel R.M.S. Titanic 52 U.S.P.Q.2d 1609, 1614 (S.D.N.Y. 1999). 
137 Burrow-Giles Lithographic, 54-55. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
minimum degree of creativity reflective of the author's personality.138 Following the United States' 
adherence to the Berne Convention in 1988 and the Feist decision in 1991, a more harmonized 
global view of copyright emerged, emphasizing the personality theory approach to originality.139  
In  fact,  some  legal  scholars  have  argued  that  U.S.  copyright  law  does  not  explicitly  exclude 
machine-generated  works  from  protection,  citing  the  low  threshold  for  what  constitutes 
originality.140 However, the focus should not be on the degree of originality (whether it is high or 
low). After Feist, originality is not only a question of quantum. For works generated by AI, the 
obstacle is not the amount, but the type of originality required. AI systems, lacking the capability 
for self-expression, cannot meet the criterion of imbuing their creations with personality, as they 
possess no personality to express. 

In recent years, several primarily common-law jurisdictions, including Australia, India, and the 
United Kingdom, have shifted towards adopting a personality-centered approach to the concept of 
originality in copyright law.141  This move has led these countries to abandon earlier frameworks 
that emphasized "labor, skill, and effort," commonly known as the "sweat of the brow" doctrines. 
A few jurisdictions like South Africa and New Zealand continue to adhere to this older view.142 

Overall,  the  prevailing  interpretation  of  originality  leans  heavily  on  an  anthropocentric 
perspective, asserting that a work can be deemed original only if it serves as an expression of the 
author's  individual  personality  or  “self”.  This  understanding  implicitly  assumes  that  only  a 
sentient, self-aware entity could fulfill such a criterion. Without the element of self-consciousness 
in  the  creator,  the  originality  requirement,  which  hinges  on  the  representation  of  the  author's 
personality,  cannot  be  satisfied.  As  a  result,  under  the  existing  legal  framework,  AI-generated 
works fall short of meeting the threshold of originality, unless future advancements in strong AI 
reach a point where machines gain self-consciousness. 

3. The (A)Infringer 

The question of whether it is possible for an AI to commit copyright infringement by producing 
an output that closely resembles or is substantially similar to a copyrighted work is at the center of 
multiple pending judicial cases. The answer, while straightforward at a glance, is subject to legal 
intricacies that differ across jurisdictions.  

In the United States, copyright infringement is considered a strict liability offense, meaning that 
fault or intent is not a requirement for liability. For an act to be deemed infringing, three conditions 
must be met: the act must involve copying rather than independent creation; the resulting copy 

138 See Feist Publications, 362-363. 
139 See Monroe Price and Malla Pollack, “The Author in Copyright: Notes for the Literary critic”, in The Construction 
of  Authorship:  Textual  Appropriation  in  Law  and  Literature,  eds.  Martha  Woodmansee  and  Peter  Jaszi  (Duke 
University Press, 1994), 717-720. 
140 Samuelson,  “Allocating  Ownership  Rights  in  Computer-Generated  Works”,  1199-1200.  See  also  Nina  Brown, 
“Artificial  Authors:  A  Case  for  Copyright  in  Computer-Generated  Works”  Columbia  Science  and  Tech.  L.  Rev. 9 
(2019): 1, 24-27; Margot Kaminski, “Authorship, Disrupted: AI Authors in Copyright and First Amendment Law”, 
51 UC Davis L. Rev. (017): 589, 601. 
141 See e.g., IceTV, 43; Eastern Book Co. & Ors v D.B. Modak & Anr (2008) 1 SCC 1; Temple Island Collections v 
New English Teas (No. 2) [2012] EWPCC 1; Rahmatian, “Originality in UK Copyright Law”, 4–34. 
142 See  e.g., Appleton v Harnischfeger Corp.  (1995) 2 SA 247 (AD), [43]– [44]; Henkel KgaA v. Holdfast  [2006] 
NZSC 102, [2007] 1 NZLR 577 [37] (NZ). 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
must  be  fixed  in  a  tangible  medium;  and  the  act  must  involve  the  improper  appropriation  of 
protected material. While the requirement of being 'fixed in a tangible medium' is more specific to 
U.S. law, the conditions concerning 'copying' and 'improper appropriation' are broadly relevant in 
many legal jurisdictions. Copying can occur in several forms: mechanical reproduction, creating a 
work substantially similar to a copyrighted one, or translating the original work to another medium. 
Importantly,  copyright  infringement  does  not  require  intent. 143  Case  law  suggests  that  even 
'innocent' or 'subconscious' copying is no defense,144 if access to the original work can be proven145 
or the similarities between the unusual aspects of the two works are sufficiently striking.146 As for 
'improper appropriation,' this depends on the character and extent of the material taken. Copyright 
infringement  can  occur  either  by  copying  the  entire  work,  by  taking  significant  qualitative  or 
quantitative parts of it, or by producing a work that is substantially similar in essence.147 Therefore, 
if the AI's generated output borrows extensively from a copyrighted work or is substantially similar 
to  it, it  would qualify as infringement.  If the use of the copyrighted material  is  transformative, 
however,  one  must  consider  whether  such  use  falls  under  the  fair  use  doctrine. 148 Generally 
speaking, transformative use is protected by fair use provisions and does not constitute copyright 
infringement.149 Therefore, whether the AI-generated images qualify as fair use would hinge on 
how transformative they are with respect to the original copyrighted works. 

The discussion above serves to address a crucial question: Can AI-generated outputs infringe upon 
the copyrights of the images, people, places, and objects used for training the models? The short 
answer  is  “yes”,  but  only  if  the  protected  content  appears  in  the  output  in  an  identical  or 
substantially similar form. Copyright infringement does not occur if the original content merely 
serves  as  an  inspiration  and  is  either  minimally  replicated  in  the  output 150  or  used  in  a 
transformative way.151  In the ongoing cases, both Stability AI and Midjourney assert that proof of 
actual infringement or substantial similarity in the generated outputs has yet to be conclusively 
demonstrated.152 Midjourney, in particular, challenges the notion that just because the outputs are 
“derived from” the images used for training their model, they should automatically be classified 
as  derivative  works. 153 They  contend  that  the  plaintiffs  are  misleadingly  conflating  the  legal 

143 See Fisher v. Dillingham, 298 F. 145, 148 (SDNY 1924) (“it is no excuse that memory played a trick”). 
144 See Bright Tunes v. Harrison, 420 F. Supp. 177, 181 (SDNY 1976). 
145 See Three Boys Music v. Michael Bolton, 212 F.3d 477 (9th Cir. 2000). 
146 See e.g., Selle v. Gibb, 741 F.2d 896 (7th Cir. 1984). 
147 See e.g., Daniel Gervais, “Improper Appropriation”, Lewis and Clark L. Rev. 23(2) (2019): 600; Oren Bracha, “Not 
de Minimis: (Improper) Appropriation in Copyright”, American U. L. Rev. 68 (2018): 139.  
148 See e.g., 17 USC § 107; Casey Newton, “How DALL-E could power a creative revolution”, The Verge, June 10, 
2022, https://www.theverge.com/23162454/openai-dall-e-image-generation-tool-creative-revolution. 
149 See Jiarui Liu, “An Empirical Study of Transformative Use in Copyright Law”, Stanford Tech. L. Rev. 22 (2019): 
163, 166; Pierre Leval, “Toward a Fair Use Standard”, Harvard L. Rev. 103, (1990): 1105, 1111. 
150 See e.g., Gervais, “Improper Appropriation”, 600; Bracha, “Not de Minimis”, 139. 
151 See  Liu,  “An  Empirical  Study  of  Transformative  Use  in  Copyright  Law”,  166;  Leval,  “Toward  a  Fair  Use 
Standard”, 1111. 
152 See Andersen et al. v. Stability Ai et al., Case no 3:23-cv-00201-WHO (N.D. Cal., April 18, 2023) (Stability AI’s 
Amended Mot to Dismiss), https://www.courtlistener.com/docket/66732129/andersen-v-stability-ai-ltd.  
153 Cf.  Daniel  Gervais,  “AI  Derivatives:  the  Application  to  the  Derivative  Work  Right  to  Literary  and  Artistic 
Productions 
1111, 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4022665.  

Machines”, 

(2022): 

Seton 

52(4) 

Hall 

Rev. 

AI 

of 

L. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
copyright concept of a  “derivative work” with a terminology they have devised to describe the 
output created by their users. 

3.1. Protection of Style 

Artists have expressed significant concern over the proliferation of AI-generated art that closely 
mimics their unique styles. These anxieties are not just abstract worries; they're directly related to 
ongoing legal disputes involving AI platforms such as Dall-E, Stable Diffusion, and Stability AI.  
Users of the AI image-generating platforms are accused of creating works that imitate the style of 
specific artists, including those who are Plaintiffs in the lawsuits.154 These users would employ 
prompts containing the artists' names to generate outputs, misleadingly suggesting that the works 
are original creations by those named artists. Referred to as 'Imposters' in the context of the case, 
these users manipulate the AI to lean heavily on the stylistic elements of the mentioned artists, 
producing images that closely resemble those artists' unique styles.155 

Creators are alarmed by the extent to which AI-generated images, designed to imitate their styles, 
are flooding online platforms and even overshadowing their original works in search results.156 
Greg Rutkowski, the most popular artist used to generate AI images and well-known for producing 
fantastical high-quality images, showed concern for the mass copying of individual styles by AI 
by noting “right now, when you type in my name, you see more work from the AI than work that 
I  have  done  myself,  which  is  terrifying  for  me.  How  long  till  the  AI  floods  my  results  and  is 
indistinguishable from my works?”157 This phenomenon raises pressing questions that are at the 
heart  of  current  litigation:  to  what  extent  can  or  should  generative  AI  be  held  accountable  for 
infringing on artists' styles? 
However,  from  a  copyright  law  perspective, 158 these  concerns  may  be  somewhat  misplaced. 
Copyright  law  traditionally  protects  the  specific  expression  of  ideas,  not  the  general  style  or 
techniques  used  to  achieve  that  expression.  In  other  words,  while  an  artist's  unique  manner  of 
expression  is  noteworthy,  it  isn't  what  copyright  law  aims  to  protect.  Instead,  copyright  would 
protect the specific expression of that style in a particular work. Courts have consistently held that 
style is just one element of artistic expression; infringement only occurs when there is substantial 
similarity between the specific expressions of two works.159 In Jewelry 10, the court explains that 

is  a  more  popular  prompt 

154 See Andersen et al. (Complaint), §5-6 
155 ibid., §171-176. 
156 See,  e.g.,  Johnston,  “Comic  Book  Creators  React  to  AI  Artificial  Intelligence  Art  Explosion”;  Baio,  “Invasive 
Diffusion”.  
157  Matt  Growcoot,  “AI  Image  Generator  Stable  Diffusion  Releases  Controversial  New  Version”,  PetaPixel,  (, 
November  28,  2022,  https://petapixel.com/2022/11/28/ai-image-generator-stable-diffusion-releases-controversial-
new-version. See also Melissa Heikkilä, “This artist is dominating AI-generated art. And he’s not happy about it. Greg 
Rutkowski 
than  Picasso”,  MIT  Technology  Rev.,  September  16,  2022, 
https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/09/16/1059598/this-artist-is-dominating-ai-generated-art-and-hes-not-
happy-about-it. 
158 This might not be the case in all jurisdictions. There is, for example, at least one case in Italy—finally settled—
where a Milanese court found an album cover of Roger Waters apparently infringing upon the “cancellation” technique 
of Emilio Isgrò. See e.g., Gabriele Antonucci, “Roger Waters – Emilio Isgrò: perché è plagio l’artwork dell’album”, 
Panorama, July 26, 2017, https://www.panorama.it/lifestyle/musica/roger-waters-e-davvero-plagio-lartwork-di-life-
really-want (in Italian only). 
159 See, e.g., Steinberg v. Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc., 663 F. Supp. 706, 706-716 (SDNY, 1987); Cummins v 
Vella [2002] FCAFC 218. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
infringement will be found in “a detailed copying which takes not only the stylistic idea but the 
manner or details of execution”.160 A ruling in the case Dave Grossman Designs v. Bortin clarified 
that  an  artist  can  use  another's  style  without  infringing  on  copyright,  as  long  as  they  don't 
substantially copy the specific expression of the original work. For example, the Court says, “Picasso 
may be entitled to a copyright on his portrait of three women painted in his Cubist motif”, but other 
artists “may paint a picture of any subject in the Cubist motif, including a portrait of three women, 
and not violate Picasso's copyright so long as the second artist does not substantially copy Picasso's 
specific expression of his idea”.161).  

In  summary,  if  an  AI  generates  an  artwork  that  merely  echoes  the  style of  an  existing  artist—
without closely replicating specific, copyright-protected elements of that artist’s work—it would 
generally not  be considered an infringement  under current  copyright law. Copyright protection 
encompasses a variety of factors like composition, framing, content, style, narrative, and artistic 
intent  that  together  make  a  work  original  and  a  representation  of  the  author’s  personality. 162 
Isolating one aspect, like style, typically does not meet the threshold for legal protection. 

3.2. Who is infringing? Asking the Right Questions  

A recent policy statement on the matter from Japan sheds some light on the distinction between 
potentially infringing input and infringing output and seems to suggest that AI-generated art is not 
inherently in violation of existing copyright laws. According to the Agency for Cultural Affairs of 
Japan, there are two key phases in the creation of AI-generated art: the learning and research stage, 
and  the  stage  of  image  and  artwork  generation.163 The  ACA’s  document  titled  document  titled 
“About the relationship  between AI  and copyright”  claims that copyrighted works  can be used 
without  permission  during  the  AI  training  phase,  since  these  works  would  be  used  for  non-
commercial purposes.164 However, the commercial production and sale of AI-generated art would 
be  subject  to  standard  copyright  infringement  laws.165 If  an  AI-generated  work  is  found  to  be 
derivative of an existing copyrighted piece, legal ramifications including damages and criminal 
charges  could  apply.  This  approach  upholds  the  conventional  mechanisms  for  copyright 
protection:  if  you  believe  your  copyrighted  work  has  been  infringed  upon  by  an  AI-generated 
piece, you can take legal action in much the same way you would for human-created art. In essence, 
the standard legal procedures remain applicable. If a lawsuit clearly demonstrates that a specific 
piece of AI-generated art is a direct copy of existing copyrighted work, then the original artist can 
claim damages. On the other hand, if the claim is based merely on a subjective sense of similarity 
without concrete evidence, the lawsuit is likely to fail, just as it would with disputes over non-AI 
art.  

160 See Jewelry 10, Inc. v. Elegance Trading Co., 1991 WL 144151 (S.D.N.Y. 1991). 
161 Dave Grossman Designs v. Bortin, 347 F. Supp. 1150, 1156 (N.D. Ill. 1972).  
162 See, e.g., Steinberg, 706-716; Malden Mills, Inc. v. Regency Mills, Inc., 626 F.2d 1112 (2d Cir. 1980) (“The two 
designs are of such likeness with regard to subject matter, style of representation, shading, composition, relative size 
and placement of components, and mood as to obviously substantially similar”); Burrow-Giles Lithographic, 53ff. 
See also Feist; CJEU, C-145/10, para 99. 
163 See  Daniel  Bueno,  “AI  Art  Will  Be  Subject  to  Copyright  Infringement  in  Japan”,  Siliconera,  June  6,  2023, 
https://www.siliconera.com/ai-art-will-be-subject-to-copyright-infringement-in-japan 
164 ibid. 
165 ibid. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
Nevertheless, given that the machine generates its output based on specific user instructions, it 
seems  reasonable  to  argue  that  responsibility  for  violations  stemming  from  the  output  should 
predominantly fall on the user. In essence, these infringements would not have occurred without 
the user's active role in eliciting the contentious material. Therefore, it's reasonable to categorize 
the machine as the "primary infringer," with the user assuming "secondary liability" for instigating 
the infringement through their directives. The rationale behind this is that the machine, trained to 
generate  a  potentially  infinite  array  of  outputs  by  its  developers,  only  produces  the  infringing 
material  as  a  direct  result  of  the  user's  targeted  instructions.  Without  these  guidelines,  the 
contentious output would merely exist as one possibility among countless others. A generative AI 
model has a range of possible outputs based on its training data and algorithms. The user's specific 
instructions act as a filter, steering the AI towards generating content that is substantially similar 
to  copyrighted  material.  In  this  sense,  the  user  can  be  seen  as  the  enabler  or  inducer  of  the 
infringement,  making  them  secondarily  liable.  Their  specific  instructions  are  what  transform  a 
potential infringement into an actual one, from among the myriad outputs the AI could generate 
based  on  its  training.  AI's  capabilities  extend  to  a  virtually  limitless  array  of  possible  outputs. 
Without  the  user's  specific  directives,  the  machine's  potential  to  generate  infringing  content 
remains  just  that—potential.  It's  the  user's  intent  and  actions  that  crystallize  this  potential  into 
actual,  actionable  infringement.  Therefore,  the  liability  for  infringement  could  be  more  closely 
linked to the queries posed to the machine, rather than the machine's responses.  

The advent of AI technology does prompt a rethinking of traditional frameworks for copyright 
infringement and courts might need to change the litmus test for infringement.166 Traditionally, 
the focus has been largely on the end-product, the “answer” that Generative AI provides to users 
prompts. The entity that produced a piece of work substantially similar to an existing copyrighted 
work would be considered liable for infringement. However, with AI stepping into the creative 
process,  the  lines  become  blurred,  and  the  focus  could  potentially  shift  to  the  questions,  or 
directives,  that  prompt  the  creation  of  such  content.  Generative  AI  compels  us  to  rethink  the 
concept  of  copyright  infringement  from  a  product-centric  to  a  process-centric  viewpoint.  The 
'questions' leading to the final work may become as, if not more, important than the work itself in 
determining liability.  

Legal systems will need to adapt to accommodate this paradigm shift, making room for nuanced 
dialogues about intentionality, specificity, and the interactive nature of modern content creation. 
First, courts might shift to intentionality. In a world of machine-generated content, a key criterion 
for  infringement  might  become  the  intent  behind  the  directive  given  to  the  machine.  Here,  the 
focus wouldn't be just on the similarity between the copyrighted work and the new work, but also 
on the intent  of the user who provided the instructions to  the machine. Did  they knowingly  or 
purposefully induce the AI to create something similar to an existing copyrighted work? Second, 
the context in which a directive is given may also gain importance. For instance, if a user asks an 
AI to "create something like X," where X is a copyrighted work, then even if the machine's output 
isn't substantially similar, the intention to infringe was clearly present. Third, courts might need to 
consider more carefully the interactive nature of AI. Traditional tests for infringement might not 
work well for AI because AI is interactive. The process of creation often involves back-and-forth 
interaction  between  the  user  and  the  machine.  This  makes  each  directive  part  of  an  ongoing 

166 See Mark Lemley, “How Generative AI Turns Copyright Law on its Head” SSRN Research Paper no 4517702/23, 
July 21, 2023, https://ssrn.com/abstract=4517702 (noting that “we may need to throw out our test for infringement, or 
at least apply it in fundamentally different ways”). 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
dialogue,  which  cumulatively  leads  to  the  final  product.  Tracking  this  dialogue  could  become 
important in determining infringement. 

Finally, given the shift towards questioning, developers might have a role to play here, too, and 
they  might  be  liable  under  certain  circumstances.  They  might  be  required  to  implement  pre-
emptive  measures  and  could  incorporate  safeguards  into  the  AI  to  flag  potentially  infringing 
directives, or to require additional confirmations from the user, making them more aware of the 
implications of their directives. In this very regard, In light of the growing concern that learned 
conditional  generative  models  may  output  samples  that  are  substantially  similar  to  some 
copyrighted  data  that  was  in  their  training  set,  researchers  are  “trying  to  come  up  with  a 
mathematical definition guaranteeing that the output of a generative model does not infringe on a 
copyrighted  work,  even  if  that  work  is  present  in  its  training  set.”167 In  the  absence  of  these 
technical safeguards, courts may extend liability to Generative AI platforms and their developers 
for producing outputs that infringe on copyrights. In the same fashion, courts might consider that 
if the developers provide a platform that allows users to generate works “in the style of a certain 
artist”, and these generated works closely resemble the original artists' styles, then a preliminary 
claim for copyright infringement appears viable. However, to truly assess the legitimacy of any 
infringement claim, a detailed comparison between the plaintiffs' original works and the alleged 
derivative works produced by the platforms is essential. To unequivocally address these pressing 
concerns, Stability AI has actually taken the deliberate step of disabling the feature that allows the 
generation of images in the styles of specific artists in its latest update.168 

CONCLUSIONS 

In this chapter, we delved deep into the intricate interplay between copyright law and the rapidly 
advancing  field  of  Generative  AI.  While  the  law  has  yet  to  fully  adapt  to  these  technological 
advances, ongoing litigation against generative AI platforms stands as a testament to the pressing 
need for legal clarification. The courts have a pivotal role to play in shaping these norms. Amidst 
the legal grey areas and pending litigation, judicial decisions will set important precedents that 
could either stimulate or stifle innovation in this arena. 

Courts ought to approach Generative AI with the nuanced understanding that it is a dual-use 
technology, holding the potential for both significant societal benefits and copyright infringement 
risks.  Historically,  such  technologies  aren't  strictly  regulated  unless  they  explicitly  encourage 
unlawful activity.169 As with online platform intermediary liability,170 the focus may be best placed 
on platforms that negligently enable copyright violations. If a platform has already taken steps to 

167  See  Nikhil  Vyas,  Sham  Kakade,  Boaz  Barak,  “On  Provable  Copyright  Protection  for  Generative  Models”, 
arXiv:2302.10870 [cs.LG] (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.10870.  
168 See Stable Diffusion Version 2, https://github.com/Stability-AI/stablediffusion. See also Matthias Bastian, “Stable 
Diffusion  v2  removes  NSFW  images  and  causes  protests”,  The  Decoder,  November  26,  2022,  https://the-
decoder.com/stable-diffusion-v2-removes-nude-images-and-causes-protests. 
169 See,  e.g.,  Sony,    417;  Reiner  Kraakman,  “Gatekeepers:  the  Anatomy  of  a  Third-Party  Enforcement  Strategy”, 
Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 2(1) (1986): 53. 
170 See, e.g., The Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998, 17 U.S.C. § 512; Directive 2000/31/EC of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of information society services, in particular 
electronic commerce, in the Internal Market, 2000 O.J. (L 178) 1-16, art 12-15; Regulation of the European Parliament 
and of the Council of 19 October 2022 on a Single Market for Digital Services and amending Directive 2000/31/EC 
(Digital Services Act), 2022 OJ L 277/1. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865

 
prevent  misuse,  the  responsibility  should  shift  to  the  user  and  follow  traditional  copyright 
infringement dynamics. In essence, the courts have the opportunity to create a balanced regulatory 
approach, safeguarding artists' rights while not stifling technological innovation. Their decisions 
will set the tone for the ethical and legal use of Generative AI moving forward. 

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4558865
