# Fuente
- archivo: Preserving_the_rule_of_law_in_the_era_of_artificial_intelligence_AI.pdf
- ruta: C:\Users\matia\desarrollo\judiciales2026ush\ingesta\trabajos\academicos\Preserving_the_rule_of_law_in_the_era_of_artificial_intelligence_AI.pdf
- extraido: 2026-04-24T11:34:06

# Contenido

Artificial Intelligence and Law (2022) 30:291–323
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-021-09294-4

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence 
(AI)

Stanley Greenstein1 

Accepted: 24 June 2021 / Published online: 17 July 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021

Abstract
The study of law and information technology comes with an inherent contradiction 
in that while technology develops rapidly and embraces notions such as internation-
alization and globalization, traditional law, for the most part, can be slow to react to 
technological developments and is also predominantly confined to national borders. 
However, the notion of the rule of law defies the phenomenon of law being bound to 
national borders and enjoys global recognition. However, a serious threat to the rule 
of  law  is  looming  in  the  form  of  an  assault  by  technological  developments  within 
artificial intelligence (AI). As large strides are made in the academic discipline of 
AI, this technology is starting to make its way into digital decision-making systems 
and  is  in  effect  replacing  human  decision-makers.  A  prime  example  of  this  devel-
opment is the use of AI to assist judges in making judicial decisions. However, in 
many circumstances this technology is a ‘black box’ due mainly to its complexity 
but also because it is protected by law. This lack of transparency and the diminished 
ability to understand the operation of these systems increasingly being used by the 
structures of governance is challenging traditional notions underpinning the rule of 
law. This is especially so in relation to concepts especially associated with the rule 
of law, such as transparency, fairness and explainability. This  article examines the 
technology  of  AI  in  relation  to  the  rule  of  law,  highlighting  the  rule  of  law  as  a 
mechanism for human flourishing. It investigates the extent to which the rule of law 
is being diminished as AI is becoming entrenched within society and questions the 
extent to which it can survive in the technocratic society.

Keywords  Artificial Intelligence (AI) · Machine Learning (ML) · Rule of law · 
Judicial decision-making systems · Explainability

 *  Stanley Greenstein 

Stanley.greenstein@juridicum.su.se

1  Department of Law, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden

Vol.:(0123456789)1 3 
292 

1  Introduction

S. Greenstein 

The study of law and information technology comes with an inherent contradiction 
in that while technology embraces notions such as internationalization and globali-
zation, the law, for the most part, is to a certain extent still confined to national bor-
ders. Transgressing this contradiction to a certain degree is the notion of the rule of 
law that carries within it the ideal that ‘the “rule of law” is good for everyone’, an 
attitude that seemingly enjoys international support.1 It is conceded that this over-
whelming support for the rule of law is based on differing interpretations of what the 
rule of law is and in some cases it may even be hijacked by those who wish to use it 
as a smokescreen to hide practices that in fact contradict its ideals. Nevertheless, for 
the most part, the rule of law still carries the ideal of being, ‘analogous to the notion 
of the “good”, in the sense that everyone is for it, but have contrasting convictions 
about what it is’.2 If the rule of law, therefore, is a notion that is worth retaining as a 
measurement of a ‘good’ that is worth striving after, it should be disconcerting that 
for a second year running, it declined in more countries than it improved in, denot-
ing an overall weakening of the rule of law worldwide.3

However,  a  second  more  concealed  threat  is  increasing  as  society  becomes 
increasingly digitalizes. This is the threat from technology, more specifically tech-
nology containing elements of artificial intelligence (AI). As large strides are made 
in the academic discipline of AI, this technology is starting to make its way into dig-
ital decision-making systems, which in turn are replacing human decision-makers, 
institutions, both public and private, seeking increasing effectivity. Human decision-
making is currently being assisted by digital decision-making systems and this func-
tion  is  increasingly  being  given  to  machines,  the  sphere  of  governance  no  excep-
tion. The threat to the rule of law lies in the fact that most of these decision-making 
systems are ‘black boxes’ because they incorporate extremely complex technology 
that is essentially beyond the cognitive capacities of humans and the law too inhib-
its transparency to a certain degree. It is here that the demands of the rule of law, 
such  as  insight,  transparency,  fairness  and  explainability,  are  almost  impossible  to 
achieve,  which  in  turn  raises  questions  concerning  the  extent  to  which  the  rule  of 
law is a viable concept in the technocratic society.

Section 2 of this article provides a brief description of the rule of law in order to 
provide a general overview of this complex concept and on which a subsequent anal-
ysis will be based. Section 3 focuses on the technological concept of AI, illuminat-
ing the complexity and opaqueness of these technologies. Section 4 provides exam-
ples of applications using this technology, the justice system just one such example. 
Section  5  provides  an  analysis  wherein  the  extent  to  which  AI  is  challenging  the 
ideals of the rule of law is depicted. Finally, Sect. 6 concludes this article.

1  Tamanaha, Brian 2004, p. 1.
2  Tamanaha, Brian 2004, p. 3.
3  World Justice Project, Insights 2019, p. 7.

1 3293

2   The rule of law as an ideal

There  are  many  interpretations  of  what  the  rule  of  law  actually  is,  which  in  turn 
complicates defining it precisely. A classical dictionary definition of the rule of law 
describes it as, ‘…the mechanism, process, institution, practice, or norm that sup-
ports the equality of all citizens before the law, secures a nonarbitrary form of gov-
ernment,  and  more  generally  prevents  the  arbitrary  use  of  power’.4  That  everyone 
is equal in the eyes of the law means that everyone is subject to the law and no-one 
is above the law, in other words that everyone, no matter who you are, is subject to 
the  laws  of  a  state.  Besides  having  the  function  of  curtailing  state  power,  another 
perspective of the rule of law defines it not only in terms of the characteristics that 
a legal system should encompass but also in terms of justice in society in general, 
human rights being one such value.5

A  central  tenet  of  the  rule  of  law  is  that  it  embodies  a  notion  of  reciprocity 
between those that govern and those that are governed. On the one hand, those in 
positions  of  authority  must  exercise  this  authority  according  to  established  public 
norms and not arbitrarily (government must act within the confines of the law) and 
on the other hand, citizens are expected to comply with legal norms, the law should 
be the same for everyone, no one is above the law and finally, everyone should be 
protected by the law.6

The  rule  of  law  discourse  is  often  defined  by  the  distinction  made  between  the 
rule  of  law’s  formal  requirements  and  the  material  aspects  that  it  is  purported  to 
encompass. This is reflected in the numerous theories of the rule of law, where some 
view the rule of law as a concept comprised purely of formal structures of govern-
ance,  these  theories  reflecting  the  concept  of  legal  positivism,  while  others  recog-
nize it as including moral considerations.7

Dworkin  illuminates  the  distinction  between  the  rule  of  law  as  comprising  the 
existence  of  formal  institutions  of  governance  against  the  notion  of  it  comprising 
considerations  of  morality,  the  first  referred  to  as  the  ‘rule-book’  conception  and 
the  latter  as  the  ‘rights’  conception.  The  former  states  that  the  power  of  the  state 
should be exercised against individuals only where this is based on rules that have 
been  made  public.  Both  government  and  citizens  must  then  abide  by  these  rules 
until they are changed according to the rules for change that have also been made 
public.  This  conception  does  not  say  anything  about  the  nature  of  the  rules  in  the 
‘rule-book’, this being related to substantive justice. The rights conception assumes 
that  people  have  moral  rights  and  duties  with  respect  to  one  another  and  political 
rights against the state. These moral rights are required recognition in the positive 

4  Choi (2021), available at https:// www. brita nnica. com/ topic/ rule- of- law (Accessed 11 June 2021).
5  Organization  for  Security  and  Co-Operation  in  Europe  (OSCE),  Rule  of  law,  Rule  of  law  |  OSCE 
(Accessed 11 June 2021).
6  Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, The Rule of Law, available at https:// plato. stanf ord. edu/ entri es/ 
rule- of- law/ (Accessed 20 December 2019), p. 1.
7  Simmonds (1986), p. 115.

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…294 

S. Greenstein 

law in order that people may enforce them through the courts or other institutions. 
It therefore disregards the distinction between formal requirements and the require-
ments of justice, requiring the rules in the rule-book to take heed of substantive and 
moral  requirements.8  The  rule  of  law  can  also  be  described  in  terms  of  function, 
where it is argued that there is a limitation to studying the notion of the rule of law 
as an object, the question of its importance for the goals of development paramount 
as well as how these are to be achieved.9 Simmonds uses the metaphor of the spoon: 
in explaining what a spoon is, the formal features are only intelligible in light of a 
description of what the spoon does, that is its purpose, and a spoon that has a bad 
purpose is a bad spoon.10

One of the most well-known theories describing the rule of law is attributed to 
Lon Fuller in his work The Morality of Law.11 Fuller too perceives the rule of law 
as a combination of the formal institutions of society together with what he terms 
‘the inner morality of law’. Fuller’s conception of the rule of law is based on eight 
principles  that  are  formalistic  in  nature:  (1)  there  must  be  rules,  (2)  they  must  be 
prospective, not retrospective, (3) the rules must be published, (4) the rules must be 
intelligible,  (5)  the  rules  must  not  be  contradictory,  (6)  compliance  with  the  rules 
must be possible, (7) the rules must not be constantly changing and (8) there must be 
congruence between the rules as declared and as applied by officials.12 Nevertheless, 
Simmonds,  in  his  interpretation  of  Fuller’s  outwardly  formalistic  depiction  of  the 
rule of law, argues that the ‘inner morality’ aspect of Fuller’s eight principles comes 
to  the  fore  in  relation  to  two  further  concepts,  namely  ‘the  morality  of  duty’  and 
‘the morality of aspiration’.13 The former involves a duty to abide by laws that are 
obligatory and either one does this or not whereas the latter concept is not an ‘either/
or’  notion  but  rather  a  question  of  degree,  where  one  strives  towards  this  ideal  to 
the best of one’s ability.14 The eight principles (representing the morality of duty in 
their rationale) provide a degree of regularity and order necessary in order to attain 
the morality of aspiration, and they represent the morality of aspiration in that they 
represent an ideal to which a legal system should strive towards.15 Furthermore, the 
attainment of the morality of aspiration requires that there be rules and orderliness, 
created by the morality of duty, and that eventually allow us to attempt to attain that 
situation  as  depicted  by  the  concept  ‘rule  of  law’.  Accordingly,  Simmonds  argues 
that  the  morality  of  duty  and  the  morality  of  aspiration  differ  in  their  goal,  where 
the latter concerns the attainment of the ‘good life’ in a context where ‘people can 
meaningfully  formulate  and  pursue  personal  projects  and  ideals’.  The  rule  of  law 
therefore is an instrument allowing us to ‘value the projective capacities of men and 

8  Dworkin, Ronald, A Matter of Principle, Cambridge Mass., Harvard University Press, pp. 11–14.
9  Matsou (2009), p. 42.
10  Simmonds (1986), p. 115.
11  Fuller (1964).
12  Fuller (1964), p. 39.
13  Simmonds (1986), p. 118.
14  Simmonds (1986), p. 118.
15  Simmonds (1986), p. 121.

1 3295

women’, an ideal that is achievable only where there are clear and notified rules.16 
Simmonds, in referring to the eight principles, states:

These values are internal to the law in the sense that they form a part of the 
concept of law itself. We understand what the law is only by reference to its 
purpose; and its purpose is an ideal state of affairs (the rule of law) represented 
by the eight principles. […][The law] carries a commitment to the idea of man 
as a rational purposive agent, capable of regulating his conduct by rules rather 
than as a pliable instrument to be manipulated; and it carries a commitment to 
the values of the rule of law as expressed in the eight principles.’17

Consequently, there are many interpretations of the rule of law that find an expres-
sion in theories, which usually reflect the interwoven nature of both the functional 
and moral aspect of the rule of law.18 Wennerström, shedding light on the practical 
manifestation of the rule of law, states that it is usually used in national and interna-
tional relations as a reference to a, ‘general order and […] predictability of events. 
It  can  refer  to  the  state  of  affairs  in  a  particular  country  or  to  the  way  in  which  a 
country conducts its international relations’. In addition to the formal and substan-
tive divide, Wennerström refers to a third conception of the rule of law, namely the 
‘functional’  conception,  measuring  the  quality  and  also  quantity  of  specific  func-
tions  of  a  legal  system,  for  example,  the  predictability  of  judicial  decisions  or  the 
waiting period for access to the judiciary.19 It is with the emphasis on functionality 
the rule of law that is measured in regard to its manifestation within a state.20 The 
World Justice Project states:

Effective  rule  of  law  reduces  corruption,  combats  poverty  and  disease,  and 
protects people from injustices large and small. It is the foundation for com-
munities  of  justice,  opportunity,  and  peace—underpinning  development, 
accountable government, and respect for fundamental rights’.21

Brownsword  describes  the  rule  of  law  as  a  combination  of  the  condemnation  of 
arbitrary governance on the one hand and the irresponsible citizenship on the other. 

16  Simmonds (1986), p. 120.
17  Simmonds (1986), p. 122.
18  See Matsou (2009), pp. 49–53 and Ziegert (2009), p. 29.
19  Wennerström  (2009),  pp.  58–60.  Wennerström  refers  to  the  formal  (procedural)  and  substantive 
(material) divide and states that the formal conceptions states that an ideal legal system has some estab-
lished elements in order for it to qualify as adhering to the rule of law, for example, independent judi-
ciary,  publically  available  laws  that  are  applied  generally,  the  prohibition  of  retroactive  legislation  and 
the judicial review of government. Measuring the material or substantive aspects is more difficult as it 
requires a deliberation of concepts such as ‘fair’ and ‘just’. In addition, Wennerström highlights that the 
formal  versus  substantive  separation  is  usually  bridged  by  a  definition  of  the  rule  of  law  that  is  suffi-
ciently broad so as to incorporate both aspects. In addition, both Anglo-American formulation of the rule 
of  law  (focussing  on  the  rights  of  the  individual)  and  the  Continental  European  Rechtsstaat  (focussing 
on the formal aspects) refer to the same values that fall under the notion of ‘legality’ and incorporate the 
same fundamental principles, albeit under a different name, Ibid, pp. 61–62.
20  World Justice Project, Rule of Law Index, 2019, (2019a), p. 7.
21  World Justice Project, World Justice Project Rule of Law Index 2019 Insights, (2019b), p. 7.

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…296 

S. Greenstein 

According  to  this  view,  the  rule  of  law  represents  a  contract  between,  on  the  one 
hand, lawmakers, law-enforcers, law-interpreters and law appliers and on the other 
hand  citizens  (including  lawmakers,  law-enforcers,  law-interpreters  and  law  appli-
ers). In its essence, the contract entails that the actions of the governors always be in 
accordance with the law and that the citizens abide by decisions made in accordance 
with the legal rules, the result being that no one is above the law.22 The Council of 
Europe has also weighed in on defining the rule of law:

The rule of law is a principle of governance by which all persons, institutions 
and  entities,  public  and  private,  including  the  state  itself,  are  accountable  to 
laws  that  are  publicly  promulgated,  equally  enforced,  independently  adjudi-
cated and consistent with international human rights norms and standards. It 
entails  adherence  to  the  principles  of  supremacy  of  law,  equality  before  the 
law, accountability to the law, fairness in applying the law, separation of pow-
ers, participation in decision making, legal certainty, avoidance of arbitrariness 
and procedural and legal transparency.23

The rule of law, therefore, is a political ideal, although its content and composition 
does remain a point of discussion and to a certain degree controversial.24 In defin-
ing the rule of law in relation to its purpose, Krygier, in simple terms, stresses the 
fact that the rule is a solution to a problem, the problem being how to make the law 
rule.25 The reason for striving to make the law rule are concerns regarding the way 
power is exercised, more specifically the abuse of power by exercising this power in 
an arbitrary manner.26 Associated with the notion of how power is exercised is the 
idea that the source of authority to rule originates from a moral right to rule, where 
this moral dimension dictates that rules be publicly declared in a perspective manner 
and are general, equal and certain.27

Associated with the notion of publicity is that of transparency. It has been argued 
that the rule of law is based upon two-pillar transparency principle, where the rule-
making process should be open to people through political representation and that 
enforcement should allow procedural safeguards in the form of the ability to contest 
decisions.28 The transparency of the rule-making process is important in respect of 

22  Brownsword (2016), p. 106.
23  Report of the Secretary General of the United Nations, The Rule of Law and Transitional Justice in 
Conflict and Post Conflict Countries, United Nations Security Council (2004), p. 4. See also Council of 
Europe Commissioner for Human Rights, Issue Paper, The Rule of Law on the Internet and in the Wider 
Digital World, at p. 8. The Council of Europe also refers to the rule of law test established by the Euro-
pean Court of Human Rights, which has the following formulation: ‘To pass these tests, all restrictions 
on fundamental rights must be based on clear, precise, accessible and foreseeable legal rules, and must 
serve  clearly  legitimate  aims;  they  must  be  “necessary”  and  “proportionate”  to  the  relevant  legitimate 
aim  (within  a  certain  “margin  of  appreciation”);  and  there  must  be  an  “effective  [preferably  judicial] 
remedy” against alleged violations of these requirements’.
24  Matsou (2009), p. 41.
25  Krygier (2019), p. 758.
26  Krygier (2019), p. 760.
27  Bayamlioglu and Leenes (2018), p. 29.
28  Bayamlioglu and Leenes (2018), p. 30.

1 3297

this inherent function of the rule of law, namely a mechanism ensuring the ability to 
contest decisions.29 It is therefore in the eye of the beholder as to whether is defined 
more in terms of the formal structures necessary for making law or more as a con-
cept requiring substantive morality. It can also be expressed in theoretical or practi-
cal terms, the latter coming to the fore in statements that it is a practical instrument 
that caters for society’s need for predictability and that orders an otherwise chaotic 
society, thereby answering the question of what tomorrow brings.30

As  illuminated  in  this  section,  the  rule  of  law  is  an  allusive  concept  that  com-
prises  multiple  interpretations,  ranging  from  its  function  as  a  mechanism  for  cur-
tailing arbitrary state power to a mechanism for describing the attributes necessary 
for  attaining  a  just  society  that  takes  cognisance  of  various  ideals  and  values,  for 
example, human rights. Considering that not all these perspectives can be examined 
simultaneously, the following sections examine the rule of law from the perspective 
of its role as mechanism for determining rules, which if followed, create the condi-
tions for allowing individuals to reach their potential in terms of the goals that they 
set for themselves and to achieve the ideals that they pursue. This is particularly rel-
evant considering that the technology described below, discussed under the umbrella 
term called AI, can be described as especially inhibiting to the extent that individu-
als are made more susceptible to being manipulated and essentially categorized by 
the  technology,  albeit  in  a  rather  blunt  manner.  Connected  to  this  is  the  notion  of 
power, which too elevates the function of the rule of law as a mechanism for mini-
mizing the abuse of power.

3   The advent of artificial intelligence

What constitutes AI is subjective and best described as moving target. What AI is 
for one person may not necessarily be AI for another, what was considered AI say 
fifteen  years  ago  is  nowadays  considered  commonplace  and  even  the  question  of 
‘what  is  intelligence?’  is  contested  and  debated.  Popular  culture  has  also  played  a 
role in the way AI is generally perceived.

Dartmouth  College  is  the  institution  accredited  with  the  birth  of  AI,  where  in 
1951  John  McCarthy,  brought  together  a  number  of  researchers  at  a  workshop  in 
order to study automata theory, neural nets and the study of intelligence.31 This new 
academic  discipline  called  ‘artificial  intelligence’,  in  addressing  problems,  sought 
solutions inspired from a number of fields, such as neuroscience, mathematics and 
information theory control theory (cybernetics), all which coincided with the devel-
opment  of  the  digital  computer.32  This  new  field  transcended  conventional  sub-
jects,  such  as  mathematics,  focused  on  topics  such  as  duplicating  human  faculties 

29  Bayamlioglu and Leenes (2018), p. 29.
30  Sannerholm (2020), p. 12 (translated by the author).
31  Russell and Norvig (2010), p. 17.
32  Brownlee (2011), p. 3.

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…298 

S. Greenstein 

(creativity,  self-improvement  and  language  use)  and  attempted  to  build  machines 
that could function autonomously in complex, changing environments.33

The above highlights that AI is not just about technology—rather, it incorporates 
multiple disciplines in attempting to create machines that think like humans. There-
fore, it is natural that these machines, in social contexts where they ‘think’ as well 
as or even better than human beings, are increasingly being used to assist and even 
replace  humans  in  decision-making  processes,  or  parts  thereof.  And  this  is  in  fact 
happening. Commercial actors and public authorities are increasingly starting to use 
machines to mediate their interaction with clients and citizens via models embedded 
in  digital  decision-making  systems.  This  increases  effectivity,  cuts  costs  and  opti-
mizes  processes  as  humans  are  gradually  replaced  by  machines.  However  limited 
access  to  this  technology  also  provides  these  actors  with  incredible  power  as  the 
technology  provides  insight  into  human  behaviour  that  only  machines  can  gauge, 
this access restricted to those that own the technology. Finally, what the below sec-
tion that examine the notion of AI will illuminate is the fact that in order to make 
decisions about people, they are essentially reduced to data points that are correlated 
with  and  mathematically  weighted  against  each  other.  This  in  turn  results  in  the 
models making the decisions, treating people based on the manner in which they are 
represented in the data as determined by the model incorporating the algorithm. This 
technology may prone to bias and mistakes and the digital representations of people 
may  not  reflect  reality.  However,  probably  the  main  harm  with  the  technology  is 
the fact that a model cannot be trained to foresee each and every personality it must 
decide about, resulting in the person having to be fitted to an existing set of factors. 
Not only is this problematic from a fundamental rights perspective, but it potentially 
prevents  a  person  from  being  allowed  to  achieve  his  or  her  potential  or  desires  in 
relation to identity creating, in turn inhibiting him or her from achieving the desired 
ideals, the manipulative effect models can have exacerbating this problem.

3.1   Achieving artificial intelligence

AI  is  an  academic  discipline  within  the  realm  of  computer  science.  It  has  been 
described  as  ‘the  field  devoted  to  building  artefacts  capable  of  displaying,  in  con-
trolled,  well-understood  environment,  and  over  sustained  periods  of  time,  behav-
iours that we consider to be intelligent, or more generally, behaviours that we take 
to be at the heart of what it is to have a mind […] any insight into human thought 
might help us to build machines that work similarly’.34 AI is an academic discipline 
that covers many subjects: philosophy, mathematics, economics, neuroscience, psy-
chology,  computer  engineering,  control  theory  and  cybernetics  and  linguistics.35 
More  specifically,  it  encompasses  topics  such  as  knowledge  representation,  heu-
ristic  search,  planning,  expert  systems,  machine  vision,  machine  learning,  natural 

33  Russell and Norvig (2010), p. 17.
34  Arkoudas and Bringsjord (2014), p. 34.
35  Russell and Norvig (2010), pp. 5–26.

1 3299

language processing, software agents, intelligent tutoring systems and robotics.36 A 
more formal definition describes AI as:

[a]  cross-disciplinary  approach  to  understanding,  modelling  and  replicat-
ing  intelligence  and  cognitive  processes  by  invoking  various  computational, 
mathematical, logical, mechanical, and even biological principles and devices 
[…] [i]t forms a critical branch of cognitive science since it is often devoted 
to  developing  models  that  explain  various  dimensions  of  human  and  animal 
cognition.37

A  test  that  became  the  yardstick  for  determining  the  presence  of  AI  is  the  Turing 
test,  which  simply  put  states  that  a  human  being,  addressing  written  questions  to 
a  hidden  entity,  cannot  determine  whether  the  written  responses  originate  from  a 
human or from a computer.38 AI technologies are characterised by two main attrib-
utes, namely, ‘autonomy’, being ‘the ability to perform tasks in in complex environ-
ments  without  guidance  by  a  user  and  ‘adaptivity’,  being  ‘[t]he  ability  to  improve 
performance  by  learning  from  experience’.39  Presently  there  is  no  legal  definition 
of AI, however a recent draft for a new regulation on AI was presented by the Euro-
pean  Commission,  where  it  is  defined  as,  ‘software  that  is  developed  with  one  or 
more  of  the  techniques  and  approaches  listed  in  Annex  I  and  can,  for  a  given  set 
of human-defined objectives, generate outputs such as content, predictions, recom-
mendations,  or  decisions  influencing  the  environments  they  interact  with’  (Article 
3)  and  where  Annexure  1  refers  to,  ‘(a)  Machine  learning  approaches,  including 
supervised, unsupervised and reinforcement learning, using a wide variety of meth-
ods including deep learning; (b) Logic- and knowledge-based approaches, including 
knowledge  representation,  inductive  (logic)  programming,  knowledge  bases,  infer-
ence and deductive engines, (symbolic) reasoning and expert systems; (c) Statistical 
approaches, Bayesian estimation, search and optimization methods.’40

While  AI  has  experienced  periods  of  greater  and  lesser  interest  over  time,  the 
recent  increase  in  its  popularity  can  be  attributed  to  a  greater  availability  of  data, 
increased processing power and more advanced mathematical algorithms which can 
be used to gain greater insight into data as well as allow AI to operate autonomously. 
This has invigorated the research area of machine learning. Machine Learning is a 
sub-category of AI and which broadly speaking concerns the use of algorithms to 

36  Frankish and Ramsey (2014), pp. 24–27.
37  Frankish and Ramsey (2014), p. 1.
38  Russell and Norvig (2010), p. 2.
39  Elements of AI, Chapter 1, available at https:// www. eleme ntsof ai. com/.
40  European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council Lay-
ing Down Harmonized Rules on Artificial Intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) and Amending Cer-
tain European Union Acts, Brussels, 21.4.2021 COM (2021) 206 final, available at Proposal for a Regu-
lation laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence | Shaping Europe’s digital future (europa.
eu) (last accessed 2021-04-29).

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…300 

S. Greenstein 

learn  from  training  data  in  both  a  ‘supervised’  and  ‘unsupervised’  (self-organized 
manner).41 It is also described as:

an  application  of  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  that  provides  systems  the  ability 
to  automatically  learn  and  improve  from  experience  without  being  explicitly 
programmed. Machine learning focuses on the development of computer pro-
grams that can access data and use it to learn for themselves. The process of 
learning begins with observations or data, such as examples, direct experience, 
or instruction, in order to look for patterns in data and make better decisions in 
the future based on the examples that we provide. The primary aim is to allow 
the  computers  learn  automatically  without  human  intervention  or  assistance 
and adjust actions accordingly.42

Machine learning is described as, ‘a subfield of artificial intelligence concerned with 
the  computerized  automatic  learning  from  data  of  patterns.  The  aim  of  machine 
learning is to use training data to detect patterns, and then to use these learned pat-
terns automatically to answer questions and autonomously make and execute deci-
sions’.43  At  the  heart  of  machine  learning  is  the  mathematical  algorithm,  which 
can  be  described  as,  ‘[a]  process  or  set  of  rules  to  be  followed  in  calculations  or 
other  problem-solving  operations,  especially  by  a  computer’.44  Whereas  a  regular 
computer system’s logic is created by a human programmer, the logic of a system 
using machine learning is created by an algorithm. Machine learning is essentially 
the application of mathematical algorithms on data to produce a model that can be 
incorporated into decision-making systems, the model autonomous to the extent that 
it can update itself based on new data. A model can be conceptualized in two ways. 
First, on an abstract level, models explain various dimensions of human and animal 
cognition  and  where  the  focus  can  be  on  the  engineering  of  smart  machines  and 
applications.45 Second, models are the core technical component of a system used to 
make decisions, having been equipped with the insights into data gained by an algo-
rithm.46 Models can also have a predictive aim in that having gained insights from 
data they can make predictions concerning human behaviour: ‘[a] predictive model 
captures the relationships between predictor data and behaviour […][o]nce a model 
has been created, it can be used to make new predictions about people (or other enti-
ties) whose behaviour is unknown’.47 The algorithm and accompanying knowledge 

41  Frankish and Ramsey (2014), p. 26. The term algorithm is also important in light of the fact that it is 
often used to describe the technology incorporating AI, for example, ‘algorithmic justice’.
42  Expert.ai, What is Machine Learning? A Definition, available at What is Machine Learning? A defini-
tion—Expert System | Expert.ai (last accessed on 2021-06-12).
43  Amir (2014), p. 200.
44  English Oxford Living Dictionaries (2019).
45  Frankish and Ramsay (2014), p. 1.
46  From the computer science perspective, any system has three main components: an input, an internal 
model and an output. When concerning modelling problems, both the inputs and outputs are known and 
the problem is then to build a model that essentially is able to link both inputs and corresponding outputs 
and deliver the correct output in relation to input, see Eiben and Smith (2010), p. 9.
47  Finlay (2014), p. 215.

1 3301

learnt is then incorporated in a computer model and rolled out as part of a decision-
making system.48 In attempting to optimize the giving of credit, by minimizing the 
risks, an algorithm will analyse the historical data in order to produce a predictive 
model that will be incorporated in any decision-making system, which is then set to 
work, predicting the likelihood or probability of new credit applicants successfully 
being able to repay their loans in the future. This learning capability of algorithms is 
central as they start to operate more autonomously and in increasingly complex and 
dynamic areas of application.49

The modelling process can be described by means of an example: a credit insti-
tution  wants  to  increase  profitability  by  identifying  risks  in  the  form  of  potential 
clients who will default on the credit repayments; the credit institution holds huge 
amounts of historical data about clients’ repayment behaviour and their associated 
circumstantial  characteristics;  an  algorithm  is  used  to  make  correlations  between 
these data points in order to discover rules (who defaulted and why); a model is cre-
ated incorporating these rules; a prospective client applied to the credit institution 
for a loan and the model incorporated into a system operated by the credit institu-
tion makes a determination of the probability that the prospective client will default 
in  his  or  her  credit  repayments  and  finally  a  determination  is  made  by  the  model, 
which  determination  may  be  followed  by  the  credit  institution.  Quite  simply,  this 
data includes information on both people who have successfully repaid their loans 
and those that have defaulted. The creation of a system for making decisions can be 
described as follows:

Two concepts of relevance within machine learning are ‘supervised’ and ‘unsu-
pervised’  learning.  Supervised  learning  is  the  process  whereby  a  programme  is 
provided with labelled input data as well as the expected results and the algorithm, 
learning the underlying patterns, is then able to identify these learned patterns when 
confronted  with  new  data.  With  unsupervised  training,  the  algorithm  is  provided 
with the input data only, and it is then able to freely analyse the data in order to find 
interesting groupings of data of its own accord and without the data being labelled. 
Supervised algorithms are essentially taught using historical data training sets, and 
once they have achieved a certain level of capability, are then applied to novel situa-
tions, where predictive decisions can be made.50

48  Models allow us to generalize about our surroundings in order the gain valuable insights that can be 
used to predict events, for a general analysis of the extent to which models are used within society, see 
Winter and Johansson (2009).
49  Frankish and William (2014), p. 26.
50  On  a  more  technical  level,  machine  learning  models  comprise  three  parts:  first,  the  model  (system 
architecture, nodes, links and weights to be applied to the data), second, the parameters (the properties 
of the training data to be learnt from) and third, the learner (comprising a learning algorithm and activa-
tion algorithm). This process is sometimes referred to using the umbrella term ‘algorithm’, see Buyers 
(2018), p. 10.

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…302 

S. Greenstein 

3.2   A technology inspired by nature

Biological inspiration has always been at the core of AI. If the end goal has been to 
achieve a mechanical intelligence on a par with human intelligence, then nature has 
also been an inspiration for attaining that goal. In other words, the art of learning has 
also occupied a central role in AI research. In attempting to develop more effective 
technology, nature has been a source of inspiration, with two sources of inspiration 
dominating, namely, the human brain (neurocomputing) and evolution (evolutionary 
computing).51

Turning to neural computing, a term that has gained attention within the AI dis-
course  is  that  of  ‘artificial  neural  networks’.  Natural  Computing  is  an  interdisci-
plinary field of study in computer science that is concerned with computation and 
biology, a sub-category of which is Biologically Inspired Computing (the study of 
biologically  motivated  computing  for  problem  solving  originating  in  the  natural 
world). It is here that artificial neural networks come to the fore as an architecture 
that is modelled on the neurons of the human brain, has adaptive learning processes, 
are  used  in  pattern  recognition  and  where  the  feedback  from  the  environment  is 
divided into either supervised or unsupervised learning strategies.52 It is in this con-
text  that  the  terms  ‘deep  learning’  or  ‘deep  neural  networks’  arise,  networks  that 
essentially learn by being fed data and information about this data (supervised learn-
ing).53  The  architecture  of  deep  neural  networks  consist  of  many  layers  of  nodes, 
to which data are sent. Typically, there is the ‘input layer’ (accepts data to the net-
work), ‘output layer’ (delivers the output) and between these two layers there may 
be many ‘hidden layers’ (where the mathematical calculations are performed on the 
input data).54 Neural networks learn just as children learn: wishing to teach a neural 
network to identify a picture of a cat, it is fed thousands of pictures of cats, with the 
pictures of cats ‘labelled’ as representing a cat (this requires a human to teach the 
algorithm what a cat looks like); then testing the ability of the neural network to rec-
ognize pictures of cats, it is fed pictures of all types of animals with the task of iden-
tifying the pictures with cats in them; where the neural network is informed that it 
got it wrong, it automatically adjusts the complex mathematical weighting structure 
at  its  inner  layers  in  order  to  ‘learn’  and  increase  its  accuracy  in  the  future;  when 
the accuracy is deemed good enough, it is put to work in the digital environment in 
order to identify cats with a certain degree of probability.

Natural  evolution  is  also  used  for  inspiration  to  determine  which  AI  solutions 
achieve the best results, given a particular problem. The natural evolution approach 
is  prevalent  when  building  predictive  models  and  determines  which  solutions  are 
best suited in order to solve a particular problem. It is based on the Darwinian the-
ory  of  evolution  and  survival  of  the  fittest.55  Therefore,  where  the  aim  is  to  learn 

51  Eiben and Smith (2010), p. 7.
52  Brownlee (2011), pp. 5–7.
53  Modin and Andrén (2019), p. 63.
54  Modin and Andrén (2019), pp. 71–72.
55  Eiben and Smit (2010), p. 3.

1 3303

the best solution to a problem, the rationale is that competition among the potential 
solutions will ultimately produce the winning (most optimal) solution.56 The ration-
ale is simply that by using the process of trial-end-error, the solutions that best solve 
the required problem will be retained and in turn used to construct new solutions.57 
In other words, only a limited number of solutions can exist in an environment and 
that  those  that  compete  most  effectively  for  resources  are  the  best  suited  for  that 
environment:

Phenotypic traits […] are those behavioural and physical features of an indi-
vidual  that  directly  affects  its  response  to  the  environment  (including  other 
individuals), thus determining its fitness. Each individual represents a unique 
combination  of  phenotypic  traits  that  is  evaluated  by  the  environment.  If  it 
evaluates favourably, then it is propagated via the individual’s offspring, other-
wise it is discarded by dying without offspring […] small, random variations 
– mutations – in phenotypic traits occur during reproduction from generation 
to generation […] new combinations of traits occur and get evaluated. The best 
ones survive and reproduce and so evaluation progresses.58

Bedau provides an example that explains how genetic algorithms works in practice. 
A problem may be to find the shortest route between two cities and in this regard, 
an itinerary may be suggested. A ‘fitness function’ will be used to calculate the ‘fit-
ness’  of  a  proposed  solution.  In  this  example,  such  a  fitness  function  will  be  the 
sum of all the segments of the itinerary, the fitness function in effect being the envi-
ronment to which the solution must adapt. The more effective solutions in turn are 
used to model new solutions by means of randomly creating ‘mutations’ compris-
ing elements of the more successful solutions, the ensuing ‘generations’ of solutions 
becoming more and more effective.59

Without delving too deeply into the intricate workings of solutions (algorithms), 
the  point  wishing  to  be  stressed  here  is  that  decision-making  algorithms,  be  they 
deep  neural  networks  or  biologically  inspired,  are  built  using  mathematical  com-
plexities  and  statistical  rules  that  far  exceed  the  cognitive  capabilities  of  most 
humans.

3.3   A question of design

An initial point when discussing design aspects of AI is that a distinction must be 
made  between  rule-based  systems  and  ML  systems.  The  former  can  be  described 
as  static  systems,  with  stand-alone  characteristics,  where  the  rules  are  determined 
by humans with ML systems, which are dynamic and heavily integrated with other 
systems.60

56  Bedau (2014), p. 303.
57  Eiben and Smit (2010), p. 1.
58  Eiben and Smit (2010), p. 4.
59  Bedau (2014), p. 303.
60  Bayamlioglu and Leenes (2018), p. 13.

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…304 

S. Greenstein 

Concerning  philosophies  of  AI  design,  two  types  prevail.  The  first  philoso-
phy  is  known  as  ‘the  traditional  approach’,  (‘good  old  fashioned  AI’  or  the  ‘neat 
approach’).  This  philosophy  employs  a  symbolic  basis  for  studying  these  mecha-
nisms, symbolic knowledge representation and logic processes that can explain why 
the systems work. Neat AI approaches are prescriptive in nature, which means that 
they provide an explanation as to why they work. The main drawback of this form of 
AI is in relation to scalability, that is, as the size and complexity of problems requir-
ing solving increase, they require increased resources (if this AI is to continue pro-
viding a guarantee in relation to the most ‘optimal’, ‘precise’ or ‘true’ solution). For 
example, algorithmic decision trees are easy to understand and to explain.61 In other 
words, as an observation falls through the decision tree branches, the logic used to 
determine which branch of the tree to send it on to or what it was that contributed to 
a certain result, is identifiable and explainable.

The second and newer philosophy is called ‘scruffy AI’ and has been described 
as ‘less crisp technique[s] that are able to locate approximate, imprecise or partially/
true  solutions  to  problems  with  a  reasonable  cost  of  resources’.  Instead  of  a  sym-
bolic base, it uses inference strategies for adaption and learning and bases them on 
biological  or  natural  processes.  Scruffy  AI  is  descriptive  (as  opposed  to  neat  AI) 
which means that it reveals how a solution was arrived at (the process for achieving 
a solution) but not why. The biggest difference between these two methods, there-
fore, is that the former can explain why a solution was suggested while the latter can 
explain  how  it  was  reached  (but  not  why).  Another  distinction  between  the  above 
two philosophies is that scruffy AI involves,’[…] the incorporation of randomness in 
their processes resulting in robust, probabilistic and stochastic decision-making con-
trasted to the sometimes more fragile determinism of the crisp approaches’. Finally, 
neat AI adopts a deductive approach to problem solving whereas scruffy AI incorpo-
rates an inductive approach.62

The above illustrates that a driving force propelling technology are market forces, 
where  the  demand  for  intelligent  problem-solving  automation  has  surpassed  the 
supply  of  problem-solving  products,  spurring  technologies  that  are  faster  but  less 
explainable. Consequently, as time and resources become a scarce commodity, more 
precise tailor-made algorithms are discarded in favour of robust solutions, that work 
across a wide array of problems in a satisfactory manner.63 In other words, the tech-
nology  can  be  made  more  explainable  but  this  comes  with  a  financial  cost,  a  cost 
that  many  commercial  entities  may  be  reluctant  to  take.  In  addition,  the  problems 
to  be  addressed  using  AI  solutions  are  becoming  more  complex,  self-driving  cars 
being one example. As the presumed benefits of AI take centre stage, so too does the 
faith in AI to solve these complex problems.

61  Finlay (2014), p. 215.
62  Brownlee (2011), p. 4.
63  Eiben and Smit (2010), at p. 8.

1 3305

4   AI in the criminal justice system

Artificial  intelligence  is  increasingly  being  incorporated  into  systems  that  are 
intended to assist actors within the criminal justice system in their decision-making 
responsibilities. This section examines one such initiative.64 One such example is the 
use of systems incorporating models to assist judges in making determinations about 
people in various circumstances, for example whether a person should be released 
pending trial but also the severity of a sentence.

The criminal justice system in the United States is an example where AI is being 
used  in  order  to  mediate  between  state  and  accused.  It  is  becoming  commonplace 
that  ‘pretrial  risk  assessment  algorithms’  are  being  consulted  when  setting  bail, 
determining the duration of prison sentences and contributing to decisions concern-
ing guilt and innocence.65 The basis for decisions made by these algorithms are fac-
tors such as age, sex, geography, socio-economic status, family background, neigh-
bourhood crime and family status.66 The intelligent aspect of any such system, and 
which is concealed in technical complexity, is the manner in which the selected fac-
tors are mathematically weighted in relation to each other in order to form a behav-
ioural profile of the accused.

In  the  matter  of  State  v.  Loomis,  where  a  Wisconsin  trial  court  sentenced  a 
defendant to six years in prison for a criminal act, the corresponding sentence was 
in part determined by ‘algorithmic risk assessment’.67 In the United States criminal 
context,  it  is  common  procedural  practice  that  judges  are  provided  with  a  presen-
tencing  investigation  report  (PSI)  that  provides  background  information  about  the 
defendant and includes an assessment of the risk of recidivism based on this report. 
In  the  above  matter,  the  PSI  incorporated  an  algorithmic  assessment  report.  The 
software, called COMPAS (Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alter-
native Sanctions), was developed by Northpointe Inc., a private company, where the 
output  comprises  a  number  of  bar  charts  depicting  the  risk  that  the  accused  will 
commit crimes in the future.68 Accompanying the PSI was also a procedural safe-
guard in the form of a written statement to the judges concerning the risks associated 

64  There  are  a  number  of  such  systems  being  introduced  into  the  criminal  justice  systems  worldwide. 
One such system is called the Harm Assessment Risk Tool (HART). HART is used by law enforcement 
in the United Kingdom in order to support decisions relating to custody matters. It produces a forecast 
of the probability that a person will commit a serious offence within the next two years. Three risk lev-
els are produced: high risk, moderate risk and low risk. For an in-dept study on how the HART system 
impacts  the  notion  of  the  fair  trial,  see  Palmiotto,  Francesca,  The  Black  Box  on  Trial:  The  Impact  of 
Algorithmic Opacity on Fair Trial Rights in Criminal Proceedings.
65  The referral to numerical factors to produce guidelines in order to arrive at a decision regarding sen-
tencing is not new. In this regard, see Wahlgren (2014), p. 187.
66  Electronic Privacy Information Centre, https:// epic. org/ algor ithmic- trans paren cy/ crim- justi ce/.
67  State  v.  Loomis,  881,  N.W.2d  749,  7532  (Wis  2016).  See  also  Harvard  Law  Review,  Criminal  Law 
(2017).
68  There  are  currently  three  systems  being  used  for  predicting  criminal  behaviour  in  the  United  States 
context:  Correctional  Offender  Management  Profiling  for  Alternative  Sanctions  (COMPAS),  Public 
Safety  Assessment  (PSA)  and  Level  of  Service  Inventory  Revised  (LSI-R).  LSI-R,  developed  by  the 
Canadian company Multi-Health Systems, takes factors such as criminal history and personality patterns 
into account, Electronic Privacy Information Centre.

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…306 

S. Greenstein 

with pretrial risk assessments. The Wisconsin Supreme Court subsequently upheld 
the  lower  court’s  decision,  stating  that  the  use  of  the  algorithmic  risk  assessment 
software did not violate the defendant’s right to due process even though it was not 
made available either to the court or Loomis.69 COMPAS assesses variables under 
five main areas: criminal involvement, relationships/lifestyles, personality/attitudes, 
family,  and  social  exclusion.70  Subsequently,  and  upon  request,  Northpointe  Inc. 
refused to make the software available citing that it was proprietary and a core busi-
ness secret.71

Another system that became the object of a court case is that of System Risk Indi-
cation (SyRI), which is a digital system used by the authorities in the Netherlands to 
identify benefit fraud in poorer socio-economic communities. The system received 
attention  due  to  a  decision  from  a  District  Court  in  the  Hague,  Netherlands,  that 
ruled that the system ne stopped due to human rights violations. The algorithm in 
SyRI was used to spy on entire neighbourhoods classed as low-income, even though 
there was no prior suspicion of fraud being committed.72 The system was enabled 
by legislation called the SyRI Act of 2013 that enabled the collection of data from 
various public databases, with data concerning income, house ownership, benefits, 
address, family relations, debts, and data on the use of water and energy being corre-
lated and weighed by the algorithm, the final output a score, where the highest level 
received the label ‘worth investigation’.73 The harms of this system were multiple, 
privacy,  discrimination  and  stigmatization  being  some  clear  examples.  However, 
another harm was the rule of law to the extent that the system allowed for the indis-
criminate wielding of power by the executive:

The laws introducing SyRI do not meaningfully limit the power of the exec-
utive  bodies  involved.  The  law  is  filled  with  vague  language  that  refers  to 
the  ‘necessity’  of  the  system,  the  ‘safeguards’  that  are  in  place,  and  a  set  of 
extremely  broad  purposes.  The  administration  has  a  very  broad  margin  to 
decide  which  data  they  will  collect  and  have  the  freedom  to  use  secret  risk 
models to analyse this data, co-opting the rationale behind operating practices 
of intelligence agencies. To my knowledge, this is an unparalleled expansion 
of  power  of  the  executive  branch,  which  exposes  every  adult  citizen  in  the 
Netherlands  to  the  danger  of  arbitrary  and  opaque  interferences.  All  of  this 
also  has  a  tremendous  damaging  effect  on  the  relationship  of  trust  that  you 
should have between citizens and the state.74

An aspect associated with the SyRI matter is that the system was based on a piece 
of enabling legislation that made its existence and operation public. This allowed for 

69  Harvard Law Review (2017).
70  Electronic Privacy Information Centre.
71  Liptak (2017).
72  United  Nations  Human  Rights  Office  of  the  High  Commissioner,  Landmark  ruling  by  Dutch  court 
stops  government  attempts  to  spy  on  the  poor—UN  expert,  available  at  OHCHR|Landmark  ruling  by 
Dutch court stops government attempts to spy on the poor–UN expert (last accessed 2021-06-12).
73  Van Eck (2020).
74  Asser Institute (2020).

1 3307

the investigation into the system. It is argued that there are many systems out there 
that are not based on legislation in this manner thus their existence is not common 
knowledge.75 With the increased use of systems like COMPAS and SyRI, there is a 
risk that we may be stumbling head-on into the ‘digital welfare dystopia’.76

The technology used in algorithmic decision-making systems is complex and the 

next section delves a little deeper into how these systems work.

5   The erosion of the rule of law in the age of AI

Technology  is  often  described  as  a  ‘double-edged  sword’  as  its  effects  on  society 
can be both beneficial but also risky. For example, technology may curtail freedom 
of expression but at the same time facilitate it. The inherent nature of AI is without 
doubt a threat to the rule of law and these must therefore be addressed. It is therefore 
necessary first to highlight some of the risks to the rule pf law.

The  Loomis  case  raises  some  important  issues.  The  Supreme  Court,  while  dis-
missing  the  matter  on  appeal,  provided  five  reasons  for  caution:  first,  COMPAS 
was  proprietary  software  and  void  of  transparency;  second,  the  COMPAS  system 
calculated the recidivism risk for groups, not individuals; third, COMPAS relies on 
national data and not on data from Wisconsin; fourth, studies question the extent to 
which sentencing algorithms disproportionately classify minority offenders as hav-
ing  a  higher  risk  and  fifth,  COMPAS  was  developed  to  assist  the  Department  of 
Corrections and not necessarily to be applied in the criminal court system.77 In order 
to limit the scope of discussion, these points act as a point of departure.

5.1   The notion of accessibility to the law

A  core  element  of  the  rule  of  law  is  that  laws  should  be  accessible  in  order  that 
people can abide by them and know what is expected of them, predictability being 
paramount.78 It is for this reason that the notions of publication and intelligibility as 

75  Van Eck (2020).
76  ‘The digital welfare state is either already a reality or emerging in many countries across the globe. 
In  these  states,  systems  of  social  protection  and  assistance  are  increasingly  driven  by  digital  data  and 
technologies that are used to automate, predict, identify, surveil, detect, target and punish. In the present 
report,  the  irresistible  attractions  for  Governments  to  move  in  this  direction  are  acknowledged,  but  the 
grave risk of stumbling, zombie-like, into a digital welfare dystopia is highlighted. It is argued that big 
technology companies (frequently referred to as “big tech”) operate in an almost human rights-free zone, 
and that this is especially problematic when the private sector is taking a leading role in designing, con-
structing and even operating significant parts of the digital welfare state. It is recommended in the report 
that, instead of obsessing about fraud, cost savings, sanctions, and market-driven definitions of efficiency, 
the starting point should be on how welfare budgets could be transformed through technology to ensure 
a  higher  standard  of  living  for  the  vulnerable  and  disadvantaged’,  United  Nations  General  Assembly, 
Report of the Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights, 2019, available at A/74/493—
E—A/74/493 -Desktop (undocs.org) (last accessed on 2021-06-12), Summary.
77  Harvard Law Review, Criminal Law (2017), p. 7.
78  Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy.

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…308 

S. Greenstein 

promoted by scholars such as Fuller are depicted as central to the rule of law. Under-
mining these prescribed attributes of the rule of law is the lack of accessibility that 
AI presents. The technological complexity associated with AI does not make it suit-
able to human comprehension, insight or transparency. For example, the mathemati-
cal calculations taking place at the hidden layers of neural networks or the mutating 
capabilities of genetic algorithms are beyond human cognitive comprehension and 
for the most part human explanation. Using the above example of teaching a neural 
network what a cat is, it is highly unlikely that the mathematical complexities of this 
operation can be fully explained in natural language. For example, it can be stated 
that a neural network was employed to solve a problem and that it can identify cats 
with a certain degree of accuracy. However, the ‘why’ in relation to the output can-
not be explained.79 It is here that the notion of natural language versus the language 
of AI gains importance. AI has rules, however these rules are the rules of mathemat-
ics and statistics. To exacerbate matters, these rules are hidden either in the propri-
etary ‘black box’ or hidden also to the extent that they cannot be understood—they 
cannot be read, they cannot be discussed, they cannot be analysed and they cannot 
be  reasoned.  The  rule  of  law  up  until  now  has  been  dependent  on  its  form  being 
in  the  format  of  natural  language—it  entails  a  governance  by  natural  language  as 
compared  to  the  governance  of  the  algorithm.80  The  rule  of  law  is  dependent  on 
natural language in order to be comprehended. This is not necessarily the case for 
all  areas  of  law,  where  some  legal  processes  are  easier  to  automate.  For  example, 
the levying of a congestion tax in the city of Stockholm, has been successfully fully 
automated.81 Therefore, as governance increasingly finds its expression in computer 
code, its comprehension by a country’s citizens is bound to decrease. This in turn 
relates to the notion of what is ‘intelligible’, with neither regular people nor judges 
applying systems like COMPAS having the cognitive ability to actually understand 
them. Even their creators do not really understand them, these self-learning and self-
evolving algorithms taking on a life of their own. This is especially so considering 
that algorithms potentially mutate themselves and updated their processes multiple 
times a second, the mathematical balancing of the attributes that the algorithm con-
siders  constantly  being  altered.82  It  is  here  that  the  technical  concept  of  interpret-
ability comes to the fore.83 It is also argued that with complexity comes the potential 
for error. It has been suggested that a rule of thumb for working with the technology 
of AI should be that the technology be deemed incorrect until proven correct.84 This 

79  Kowalkiewicz (2019).
80  Suksi (2017), p. 292 (Footnote 16).
81  Wahlgren, Automatiserade Juridiska Beslut (2018), p. 414.
82  In general, technology is testing the ability of traditional legal frameworks to keep pace. For example, 
from the contract law perspective, it is becoming challenging for humans to determine the existence of a 
contract where potentially thousands of contracts can be entered into between machines in just a fraction 
of a second. For an analysis of the notion of time in relation to law, see Lundblad (2018), p. 401–414.
83  For an extended discussion on interpretability, see Greenstein (2017), p. 421.
84  Suksi (2017), p. 296 (Footnote 21).

1 3309

highlights  the  importance  of  the  right  to  complain,  where  important  decisions  are 
taken automatically by autonomous machines.85

It seems that there is a psychological line, that when crossed, places the rule of 
law on a collision course with AI. This is the moment at which we allow machines 
to  make  decisions  over  human  beings  without  humans  really  understanding  how 
these  machines  work.  Public  services  may  be  automated  and  algorithms  may  be 
used to streamline government. However, the moment one uses opaque technology 
that is incomprehensible, our trust in the technology is nothing more than the ina-
bility to understand it. AI is an existential threat to the rule of law and a question 
that has been put is whether the future will bring with it a rule of law or a rule of 
algorithm?86

It is in this regard that the notions of legality and accessibility of the rule of law 
as expressed in the Venice Commission are triggered. It requires that laws are acces-
sible,  that  court  decisions  are  accessible  and  that  the  effects  of  laws  are  foreseea-
ble.87  However,  the  use  of  AI  by  the  judiciary  can  be  seen  as  undermining  these 
principles as illustrated above.

5.2   A black box created by law

The  blame  for  the  erosion  of  the  rule  of  law  cannot  be  put  squarely  at  the  foot  of 
technology.  Sometimes  the  law  itself,  as  a  mechanism  for  balancing  conflicting 
interests, reaches a balance between these interests in the form of balancing the vari-
ous  rights  and  obligations  of  different  stakeholders  in  traditional  legal  documents. 
However, technology is a disruptor of society in many ways and one manifestation 
of this disrupting characteristic is its putting out of synch the balancing of interests 
that may have occurred by means of traditional law.

The  General  Data  Protection  Regulation  (GDPR)  is  an  example  of  this  balanc-
ing  act  performed  by  traditional  law  in  the  context  of  data  protection.  This  legal 
framework attempts to balance intellectual property rights against rights associated 
with privacy in relation to AI. Recital 63, expanding on Article 22 which deals with 
AI,  affords  the  data  subject  a  right  to  know  and  receive  communications  regard-
ing the logic behind any data processing in relation to automated decision-making. 
This potentially grants the data subject the right to an explanation of the technology. 
However, this right is watered down in the very same recital where trade secrets and 
intellectual  property  rights  take  precedence  over  transparency.88  This  can  be  seen 
in the light of a right to information concerning the processing of personal data can 
be  found  in  Article  15(1)(h)  GDPR  that  provides  the  data  subject  with  a  right  to 
information about the logic involved in automated processing and the consequences 

85  Magnusson Sjöberg (2016), p. 310.
86  Suksi (2017), p. 316.
87  European Commission for Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission) (2016), p. 15.
88  Regulation  (EU)  2016/679  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  27  April  2016  on  the 
protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of 
such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation), OJ L 119, 4.5.2016.

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…310 

S. Greenstein 

thereof,  although  it  has  been  argued  that  a  ‘right  to  information’  is  the  same  as  a 
‘right to explanation’.89 Here it can be argued that the balancing of privacy against 
intellectual property is disrupted by the nature of the technology itself—AI cannot 
be compared to any technology preceding it and it can be argued that transparency 
into its inner working is absolutely necessary in order to provide adequate adequate 
protection from its harms. Hence the argument that intellectual property rights are 
potentially assisting in the creation of the black box of technology.

The obstacle of proprietary software arose in the Loomis case where the appli-
cant  asserted  that  he  had  the  right  to  information  that  the  trial  court  had  used  at 
sentencing, but that the proprietary nature of COMPAS prevented this. The reply of 
the Supreme Court was that,’[…] Northpointe’s 2015 Practitioner’s Guide to COM-
PAS explains that the risk scores are based largely on static information (criminal 
history), with limited use of some dynamic variables (i.e. criminal associates, sub-
stance abuse).’ In addition, the court argued that the COMPAS score was based on 
questions that the appellant himself had answered, which gave him access to infor-
mation  upon  which  the  risk  assessment  was  made.  In  the  SyRI  case  too,  the  pro-
prietary nature of the technology, creating a black box in terms of insight into the 
technology, is argued to have weighed against the state in that the court was not able 
to verify the state’s claims as to how the technology works.90

Considering  the  wide  ambit  of  the  applicability  of  the  GDPR,  it  is  not  incon-
ceivable  that  it  will  be  relevant  in  many  circumstances  where  AI  is  used  to  make 
administrative decisions or even in the justice system. Here too the SyRI case illu-
minated  the  GDPR  by  referencing  the  data  protection  principles  of  transparency, 
purpose limitation, and data minimization, the latter two making up the proportion-
ality principle.91

It  is  acknowledged  that  there  are  good  reasons  as  to  why  intellectual  property 
rights and trade secrets are protected in law. For example, intellectual property rights 
have the goal of encouraging creativity and providing an economic incentive for cre-
ativity. However, considering the potential for errors or inaccuracies in the decisions 
made by AI in the public domain, it is not inconceivable that a clash between the 
rule of law and the values it carries (openness, transparency, right to explanation and 
check on the abuse of power) and other areas of law may be brought to the fore by 
the increased reliance on AI.

Finally, it should be noted that the imbalance created by AI in relation to differing 
interests can be rectified by various mechanisms. In this regard, trusted third parties 
may have a constructive role in ensuring that algorithms are developed and applied 
in accordance with the values of the rule of law. For example, in the United King-
dom, The Law Commission on the Use of Algorithms in the Justice System recently 
published a report where one of the recommendations was the creation of a National 
Register of Algorithmic Systems, where various aspects in relation to the algorithms 

89  Wachter et al. (2016).
90  Battaglini (2020).
91  Battaglini (2020).

1 3311

being used in the criminal justice system could be checked and verified.92 This idea 
is also reflected in the draft regulation on AI made public recently by the European 
Commission. Here, in relation to high-risk AI, the draft regulation creates the mech-
anism whereby these AI systems must be registered in an EU database (Article 51) 
established  by  mean  of  collaboration  between  Member  States  (Article  60).93  It  is 
argued that the use of trusted third parties potentially increases insight into the com-
plexity of AI while at the same time preventing general public insight, thereby main-
taining the interests protected by intellectual property rights.

5.3   Detecting bias and discrimination in data

The notion of bias is an inherent aspect of data science and therefore technologies 
AI. In other words, the second you handle data it automatically brings with it bias. 
The act of choosing one dataset over another will potentially reflect a certain bias. 
Bias  can  be  both  intentional  and  unintentional  and  a  rule  of  thumb  should  always 
be  that  a  data  set  incorporates  some  degree  of  bias.  Bias  is  present  in  almost  all 
data sets and biased data will invariably lead to a biased output by the models that 
are trained on this biased data.94 A definition of bias is that, ‘the available data is 
not representative of the population or phenomenon of study […][that] [d]ata does 
not include variables that properly capture the phenomenon we want to predict [and 
that]  [d]ata  includes  content  produced  by  humans  which  may  contain  bias  against 
groups of people’.95 The problem with bias and discrimination in a data context is 
that  ‘masking’  can  occur:  this  occurs  where  two  characteristics  are  correlated,  the 
one trivial and the other sensitive, and where the former is used to indicate the pres-
ence of the latter.96 Typical example are using area code (zip code) to denote health 
status, where socio-economic factors may play a role or using area code instead of 
race. Bias should also be distinguished from discrimination, which is a legal concept 
that can be described as, ‘the prejudiced treatment of an individual based on their 
membership in a certain group or category’, where the attributes encompassing dis-
crimination include race, ethnicity, religion, nationality, gender, sexuality, disability, 
marital status, genetic features, language and age.97 Consequently, a model is said 
to be discriminatory in situations where two individuals have the same characteris-
tic relevant to a decision making process, yet they differ with respect to a sensitive 
attribute,  which  results  in  a  different  decision  produced  by  the  model.98  Bias  and 

92  The Law Society of England and Wales, p. 6.
93  European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council Lay-
ing Down Harmonized Rules on Artificial Intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) and Amending Cer-
tain European Union Acts, Brussels, 21.4.2021 COM(2021) 206 final, available at Proposal for a Regula-
tion laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence | Shaping Europe’s digital future (europa.eu) 
(last accessed 2021-04-29).
94  Prabhakar (2019).
95  For an in-depth description of the different types of bias that can occur, see Prabhakar (2019).
96  Custers (2013), at pp. 9–10.
97  Calders (2013), p. 44.
98  Calders (2013), p. 44.

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…312 

S. Greenstein 

discrimination  are  therefore  related  to  the  extent  that  bias  in  data  can  lead  to  dis-
criminatory effects, but may not necessarily do so in all cases.

Subsequent to the Loomis case, the use of AI in the justice system in the United 
States has received increased media attention. This especially since ProPublica, hav-
ing examined the outcomes of cases where algorithmic risk assessments have been 
used, has claimed that the statistics are starting to identify a racial bias in decisions, 
where White people were treated more favourably than African Americans.99 First, 
examining 7000 decisions, the results showed that the algorithm is only 20 percent 
successful  in  accurately  predicting  recidivism.  Second,  the  algorithm  incorrectly 
flagged African Americans at twice the rate of White people.100 The Venice Com-
mission treats equality before the law and non-discrimination as an essential element 
of the rule of law.101 Here grounds for discrimination include race, colour, sex lan-
guage, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with 
national minority, property, birth or other status.102

One example of how bias can creep into data is via context. For example, a data 
set from one context used to train an algorithm may not work as expected in another 
context. Data is contextual and using data from one context in another context can 
lead to incorrect decisions. Data is described as ‘spatio-temporal’ with data having a 
certain meaning in a defined situation but this meaning can vary in another situation, 
as well as over time.103 Once again the Loomis case is an example of this. COM-
PAS was developed to be used by the Department of Correction but is now being 
deployed for use in sentencing. These are different contexts and while an algorithm 
learnt from one context the conclusions it draws may not be as relevant in another 
context.  Here  attention  must  be  drawn  to  the  issue  of  contextual  data  or  systems 
being developed for one context being used in another. In this regard mention can 
be made of other research on the degree with which predictive models used in the 
criminal justice system can lead to unfair outcomes. In one paper, Machine Learning 
algorithms were compared against conventional systems in relation to the prediction 
of juvenile recidivism. The main conclusions were that the Machine Learning mod-
els scored slightly higher with regards to accuracy whereas with regards to fairness, 
the Machine Learning models tended to discriminate against males, foreigners and 
specific national groups.104

99  Angwin et al.
100  Angwin  et  al.  The  statistics  showed  that  of  those  labelled  ‘high  risk  but  did  not  re-offend’,  23.5% 
were White and 44.9% African American and of those labelled ‘low risk yet did re-offend, 47.7% were 
White and 28% African American.
101  European Commission for Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission) (2016), p. 18.
102  European Commission for Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission) (2016), p. 18.
103  Van der Sloot (2013), p. 285.
104  Tolan  et  al.  This  paper  investigated  the  trade-off  between  performance  and  fairness  between  ML 
models  and  the  Structured  Assessment  of  Violence  Risk  in  Youth  (SAVRY)  risk  assessment  tool.  The 
main  feature  of  SAVRY  is  that  it  is  an  ‘open  and  interpretable  assessment’  that  guides  the  assessor 
through  the  individual  features,  ensuring  a  high  level  of  individual  involvement.  It  is  also  noteworthy 
that, ‘[t]his final evaluation is a professional judgement, not algorithmic’. This examination is relevant in 
relation to the above reference to rule-based systems and Machine Learning systems in 3.3. It is precisely 
the dynamic nature of Machine Learning that makes a determination regarding causation in law so much 
more difficult, as highlighted in Bayamlioglu and Leenes (2018), p. 18.

1 3313

It is within the realm of the Venice Commission that discrimination is viewed in 
opposition  to  the  rule  of  law,  where  not  only  is  non-discrimination  demanded  but 
also  ‘equality  in  law’  and  ‘equality  before  the  law’.  This  is  a  relevant  distinction 
within the context of decision-making systems incorporating elements of AI, where 
it can be difficult to identify an inequality or specific instance of discrimination. Put 
another way, the existence of the prerequisites demanded by a traditional law may be 
difficult to identify within the complex mathematical processes of AI. Compounding 
the situation is the notion that the mathematical rules of the decision-making models 
have not necessarily been exposed to traditional law-making procedures, but rather 
are ‘promulgated’ by private corporations.105

5.4   The potential for the abuse of power

The argument of Krygier, mentioned above, is that the rule of law essentially con-
cerns power, where its main goal is to make law rule in order to curb the potential 
for abuse of power by those who use this power in an arbitrary manner. He states 
that  there  are  many  ways  to  exercise  power  and  that  the  arbitrary  ways  should  be 
shunned.106 It is in this context that the Venice Commission benchmark of ‘preven-
tion of abuse (misuse) of power’ is relevant. It is submitted that there is a correla-
tion  between  on  the  one  hand  defining  the  rule  of  law  through  the  lens  of  power 
and on the other hand the notion of reciprocity. For reciprocity to flourish, a certain 
equilibrium in the power relationship between those that govern and the governed is 
required. However, it is argued that the transfer of governance to technology, such 
as  witnessed  in  the  Loomis  case,  brings  with  it  a  monopoly  in  terms  of  access  to 
the  technology.  It  is  essentially  only  those  who  govern  that  have  the  resources  to 
produce  or  purchase  the  technology  that  is  used  to  make  decisions  about  citizens. 
This continually increasing imbalance is disempowering the governed in favour of 
those who govern. For example, with the monopolization of the power over technol-
ogy  in  the  hands  of  those  that  govern,  the  risk  that  executive  discretion  becomes 
unfettered increases, this being contrary to the rule of law as expressed by the Ven-
ice  Commission.107  In  addition,  an  aspect  of  the  abuse  of  power  as  identified  by 
the Venice Commission is irrational decisions.108 However, to what extent can the 
decisions taken by AI ever be challenged as ‘irrational’ when they firstly cannot be 
comprehended but also when human rationality is not necessarily a prerequisite for 
an algorithmic solution? A final complexity in the power equilibrium is the fact that 
the producers of AI technology are private actors, the power equilibrium essentially 
having to be achieved between three entities,  namely  those  that govern,  those  that 
are governed and the private corporations developing the technology for mediation. 
The Venice Commission does recognize that there may be situations where private 

105  For a discussion on the role of private actors in the justice system, see Fitzgibbon and Lea (2020).
106  Krygier (2019), p. 761.
107  European Commission for Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission) (2016a), p. 17.
108  European Commission for Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission) (2016a), p. 17.

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…314 

S. Greenstein 

actors exercise powers that traditionally have been exercised by states.109 However, 
the examples provided include the management of prison services, and it is argued 
that  situations  where  private  actors  take  over  the  judicial  discretion  of  judges  was 
never envisaged.

5.5   Challenging traditional legal protections

The  increased  use  of  AI  to  predict  human  behaviour,  more  specifically  criminal 
behaviour, is also challenging some traditional legal notions. One legal notion being 
challenged  is  that  of  an  accused  being  regarded  as  innocent  until  proven  guilty. 
For example, the use of algorithmic risk  assessments  in criminal  trials in order  to 
determine  recidivism  raises  the  question  of  whether  the  accused  is  deemed  guilty 
of  a  potential  crime,  that  is  the  propensity  to  commit  a  crime  before  it  has  actu-
ally occurred. This is recognized in the principles of ‘nullum crimen sine lege’ and 
‘nulla poena sine lege’ which recognize that there is no crime or punishment with-
out a law, these principles also incorporated in the Venice Commission.110 The pre-
sumption of innocence and right to a fair trial are encompassed in the benchmarks 
regarding the access to justice of the Venice Commission.

Another challenge to the traditional view of the rule of law is the extent to which 
the  judiciary,  relying  on  AI  developed  by  private  corporations,  can  be  deemed 
independent.  The  Venice  Commission  demands  that  there  should  be  legal  guaran-
tees in order to secure the independence of the judiciary. Independence, according 
to  the  Venice  Commission  is  taken  to  mean  a  judiciary  ‘free  from  external  pres-
sure’.111 While the corporations that produce algorithmic risk assessments may not 
directly exert pressure on judges, a question that requires raising is to what extent 
people  (judges,  jurors,  and  parole  officers)  will  dare  go  against  a  risk  assessment 
made by technology. This in turn brings to the fore issues of a philosophical nature 
where technology is granted a degree of autonomy. Ellul argues that technology has 
acquired an autonomy from its association with the legitimacy of scientific progress 
in general. In other words, technology has a legitimacy due to the perception that it 
is scientific and objective.112

5.6   The right to contest decisions

One of the core characteristics of the rule of law, as discussed above, is the notion of 
a right to contest decisions. Considering the black box nature of AI—due its com-
plexity  as  well  as  due  to  legal  constructions  associated  with  intellectual  property 
law—it becomes apparent that the right to contest decisions weakens considerably. It 
is argued that, ‘… in techno-regulatory settings, the three phases of legal process as: 

109  European Commission for Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission) (2016a), p. 14.
110  European Commission for Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission) (2016a), p. 16.
111  European Commission for Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission) (2016a), p. 20.
112  Ellul (2003), pp. 386–395.

1 3315

direction (rule making), detection and correction collapse on top of each other and 
become an opaque inner process imbedded in the systems’.113 One potential solution 
is that of making contestability part of the design process.114 However, one problem 
revolves around the fact that in order to contest a decision, for example an automated 
decision, one first needs to know that a decision has been taken about oneself. This 
my not be that challenging, for example, in the COMPAS situation where it is rather 
clear that a person has been subject to a decision by a black box. However, there are 
decisions taken about people every day that do not reach any formal forum, such as a 
court of law, a consequence being that we are never enlightened about the fact that a 
decision was actually taken.115

Relevant in this regard is how one could be notified that one has been the object if 
a decision taken by AI, for example in the form of a predictive model. One sugges-
tion is the creation of a right of access to the knowledge that a decision was taken, 
this  referred  to  as  a  ‘right  to  know’.  Branscomb  advances  such  a  right,  calling  it 
‘the right to know’, stating that this right can be complex and also can take on vari-
ous  forms.  In  other  words,  the  enforcer  of  the  right  can  be  a  different  protagonist 
depending on the circumstances. For example, it could be a right for an individual 
to know his or her origins or it may be the right of the public to know the basis for 
decisions  of  a  public  nature.116  The  idea  is  that  some  form  of  notification  mecha-
nism would alert a person to the fact that an entity has taken a decision about him or 
her by means of AI.

It is also important to consider the manner in which technology can assist with 
the  right  to  contest  decisions,  thereby  fortifying  the  rule  of  law.  Here  reference  is 
made to the ‘chatbot lawyer’ called DoNotPay. This application uses artificial intelli-
gence and provides a free service that assists individuals, who have received a park-
ing fine, to appeal that parking fine via a user-friendly interface. Having received a 
parking fine, the individual accesses the chatbot lawyer and is prompted in an inter-
active manner to provide certain details surrounding the circumstances under which 
the fine was received. Thereafter the chatbot lawyer seeks a legal bases upon which 
to file an appeal against the fine. For example, it could be that there were no signs 
reflecting that it was illegal to park in a particular manner. Having provided the nec-
essary information, the user merely presses a button and the appeal is automatically 
sent off to the authorities.117

113  Bayamlioglu and Leenes (2018), p. 30.
114  Sarra (2020).
115  Reference is made to Footnote 76 that mentions the notion of the ‘digital welfare dystopia’.
116  Branscomb (1985) p. 86.
117  Gibbs (2016).

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…316 

S. Greenstein 

6   Analysis: constraining human flourishing

Having examined the notion of the rule of law, it is submitted that one of its main 
functions is to allow human beings to flourish. In other words, it allows individuals 
to attain their desired goals and be creative in deciding what a good life is, this state 
also referred to as having agency. One of the main harms of AI is that this technol-
ogy curtails human agency thereby diminishing human flourishing, the promotion of 
which is argued to be a goal of the rule of law.

A question that can be asked is if one of the aims of law in general is to condition 
a desired type of behaviour in society, what then is the difference between a system 
of  governance  under  the  rule  of  law  and  say  another  system  of  social  control  that 
uses technology to designate the ‘model citizen’, thereby encouraging citizens to live 
up to this measure?118 The answer potentially is provided by Simmonds in his inter-
pretations of Fullers eight principles, addressed above. Simmonds refers to the fact 
that the law is not the only form of governance, other forms being coercion, social 
conditioning or mediation and compromise. However, the law stands out in relation 
to these other forms of social control to the extent that it bears a commitment to the 
idea that people are rational purposive agents capable of regulating their conduct in 
relation to rules as well as a commitment to the rule of law as expressed by Fuller 
in his eight principles.119 In other words, the rule of law is an instrument that allows 
people  to  adjust  their  behaviour  in  relation  to  the  law,  it  allows  them  to  be  free 
agents in effect enhancing personal autonomy and it is to a certain extent empower-
ing. It is argued that the notion of reciprocity, as encompassed by the rule of law, is 
that notion that allows individuals to attain a certain level of agency. According to 
Murphy,  the  rule  of  law  specifies  certain  requirements  that  lawmakers  must  abide 
by in order to govern legally, in other words, restricting the extra-legal use of power, 
continuing that the rule of law ensures that the political relationships structured by 
the legal system express the moral values of reciprocity and respect for autonomy.120 
She continues that citizens experience resentment when the law is not clear, if the 
law is contradictory or if it is not properly enforced and in general when citizens fol-
low the law without this being reciprocated by government.121 Fuller states:

Certainly there can be no rational ground for asserting that a man can have a 
moral obligation to obey a legal rule that does not exist, or is kept secret from 
him, or that came into existence only after he had acted, or was unintelligible, 
or  was  contradicted  by  another  rule  of  the  same  system,  or  commanded  the 
impossible, or changed every minute.122

118  Just  one  example  of  the  use  of  technology  in  order  to  determine  the  model  citizen  is  described  in 
Stanley (2015) and Chin (2016).
119  Simmonds (1986), p. 115.
120  Murphy (2005), p. 239.
121  Murphy (2005), Colleen, p. 242.
122  Fuller (1964), p. 39.

1 3317

  It  is  therefore  argued  that  one  of  the  greatest  concerns  with  AI  is  in  relation  to 
algorithmic governance, where the notion of reciprocity is diminished. Brownsword 
refers to the regulatory environment that is technologically managed as opposed to 
rule-based and makes the distinction between traditional normative rule-based reg-
ulatory  instruments  and  non-normative  technological  management.123  The  above 
notions are succinctly distinguished by referring to the former as speaking in terms 
of’oughts’ and the latter in terms of ‘can’ and ‘cannot’.124 Consequently, the tradi-
tional  rule-based  regulatory  environment  provides  the  citizen  with  a  choice  as  to 
follow this rule or not whereas the latter provides no such option—it is a take it or 
leave  it  situation,  where  the  programming  code  determines  behaviour  and  there  is 
no leeway for considering the degree to which one wants to live up to a rule. It is 
precisely this that places the notion of reciprocity in danger. Brownsword argues that 
it  is  still  important  to  recognize  the  link  between  the  regulators’  normative  inten-
tions and the technology that embeds these intentions in that it enables a testing of 
the technology against the rule of law.125 In other words, if the rule being enforced 
by  the  technology  lives  up  to  the  rule  of  law,  then  the  technology  too  lives  up  to 
the rule of law. However, it is argued that it is exactly here that it is crucial to make 
a distinction between the different types of technology, or more precisely, between 
the  technology  where  normative  rules  have  been  transformed  into  code  by  human 
programmers (regular programming) and the technology of AI. For it is within the 
context of the latter that the rules that regulate may have been identified by the tech-
nology itself, may fluctuate from one second to the next and may operate differently 
if the input data changes with just one single data point. In addition, in the age of 
technological management, the regulators are private companies who make the rules 
that  are  locked  away  in  black  boxes.  Probably  affecting  the  notion  of  reciprocity, 
the most is the fact that in the age of technological management, to what extent do 
people even know that they have been the subject of a decision, the technologies of 
regulation hidden where we may not expect them to be. Considering the notion of 
a contract between the regulators and citizens, Brownsword himself alludes to the 
fact that any defection on either side can lead to a downward spiral of diminished 
trust.126

This raises a number of questions in the age of AI: to what extent is it possible for 
citizens to enter into this contract of reciprocity with machines, to what extent are 
citizens increasingly being expected to adhere to the notion of reciprocity where the 
opposing partner is not Government but rather private corporations that produce the 
technology, to what extent can human agency and autonomy exist as values in socie-
ties characterised by technocratic governance, to what extent can the governance of 
the algorithm be considered fair when it is hidden in the ‘black box’ and finally, how 
can we be expected to abide by rules that potentially change in a micro-second?

123  Brownsword (2016), p. 102.
124  Brownsword (2016), p. 102.
125  Brownsword (2016), p. 102.
126  Brownsword (2016), p. 107.

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…318 

S. Greenstein 

It is argued that human agency is a concept that runs contrary to AI processes. A 
central questions is that of equal treatment and fairness, where being incorporated 
into a group does not necessarily mean that one shares all of that groups characteris-
tics.127 It has been suggested that, ‘persons should always be treated as persons with 
interests and a voice that needs to be heard’ and one can question the extent to which 
AI diminishes people to data points, hidden in the black box of complexity, effec-
tively taking away peoples’ voices.128

The notion of human flourishing is addressed by Floridi et al.129 Here the notion 
of promoting human flourishing in the light of AI developments is reflected upon. 
Here human flourishing is described in terms of, ‘who we can become (autonomous 
self-realisation);  what  we  can  do  (human  agency);  what  we  can  achieve  (individ-
ual and social capabilities; and how we can interact with each other and the world 
(societal cohesion).’130 The authors argue that AI’s predictive power should be used 
for fostering self-determination and social cohesion instead of undermining human 
flourishing,  reference  made  to  the  House  of  Lords  Artificial  Intelligence  Commit-
tee’s Report wherein it is argued that people should be able to, ‘flourish mentally, 
emotionally and economically alongside artificial intelligence’.131

7   Conclusions

The rule of law as a legal notion is elusive to the extent that the more one attempts 
to define it, the more diffuse it appears to become. The spectrum describing the rule 
of law is long—it is viewed as a political ideal, a mechanism for curtailing the abuse 
of power as well as a mechanism for ensuring that society uphold certain values, for 
example, human rights. A common denominator of the rule of law is that it is viewed 
as a notion that is worth protecting despite its susceptibility to political abuse.

Modern  technologies  are  increasingly  being  used  within  society,  AI  a  prime 
example. As Machine Learning techniques are improved, so to are AI systems being 
used  to  assist  human  decision-makers  in  almost  all  fields.  It  should  be  anticipated 
that  as  these  technologies  become  better  at  assisting  with  decisions,  more  control 
and  responsibility  will  be  transferred  to  them.  It  is  therefore  important  that  heed 
should be taken to the fact that these technologies are challenging the ideals asso-
ciated with the rule of law as a concept of traditional law. In addressing the harms 
associated with AI in relation to the rule of law, a common denominator that stands 
out is the manner in which it potentially inhibits the flourishing of humans. While 

127  Here reference is made to the notion of ‘non-distributed groups’ or classification, where not all the 
members of a group share all the attributes of that group, yet are treated as if they do. See Vedder (1999), 
p. 275 in Greenstein (2017).
128  Krygier (2019), p. 763, interpreting Waldron, Jeremy, The Rule of Law and the Importance of Proce-
dure, New York University School of Law, Public Law Research Paper No 10-73, 2010.
129  Floridi et al. (2018).
130  Floridi et al. (2018), p. 690.
131  UK  House  of  Lords  Artificial  Intelligence  Committee’s  Report,  AI  in  the  UK:  ready,  willing  and 
able? (2018) in Floridi et al. (2018).

1 3319

this may traditionally not be the first association in relation to the rule of law as a 
concept, it is nevertheless important to address as human agency can be argued to be 
a cornerstone of society.

A challenge for the future will be how to reap the benefits of AI for society while 
at  the  same  time  protecting  society  from  its  harms,  essentially  promoting  innova-
tion while at the same time balancing it against the interests of society. A challenge 
will be to determine which values to balance technology against. In this regard, it is 
argued that the values enshrined in the rule of law operate as a good starting point in 
determining the fabric of any society. Herein lies the value of protecting the rule of 
law from technologies incorporating AI.

Funding  Open access funding provided by Stockholm University.

Open Access  This  article  is  licensed  under  a  Creative  Commons  Attribution  4.0  International  License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is 
not  permitted  by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,  you will  need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen 
ses/ by/4. 0/.

References

Books

Berling P, Ederlöf J, Taylor V (eds) (2009) Rule of Law Promotion: Global Perspectives, Local Applica-
tions. Skrifter från juridiska institutionen vid Umeå universitet Nr 21. Iustus Förlag, Uppsala

Branscomb A (1985) Property rights in information. In: Guile B (ed) National Academy of Engineering, 
Information Technologies and Social Transformation, National Academy Press, Washington DC
Brownlee  J  (2011)  Clever  Algorithms:  Nature-Inspired  Programming  Recipes.  http:// github. com/ cleve 

ralgo rrith ms/ Cleve rAlgo rithms

Buyers J (2018) Artificial intelligence: the practical legal issues. Law Brief Publishing, Somerset, 2018
Custers B, Calders T, Schermer B, Zarsky T (eds) (2013) Discrimination and privacy in the information 

society: data mining and profiling in large databases. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg

Dworkin R (1985) A matter of principle. Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass
Eiben A, Smit J (2010) Introduction to evolutionary computing. Springer, Heidelberg
Fitzgibbon W, Lea J (2020) Privatising justice. Pluto Press, London
Frankish K, Ramsey W (eds) (2014) The cambridge handbook of artificial intelligence. Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, Cambridge

Greenstein  S  (2017),  Our  Humanity  Exposed:  Predictive  Modelling  in  a  Legal  Context.  Dissertation 
Stockholm  University,  available  at  http:// su. diva- portal. org/ smash/ record. jsf? pid= diva2% 3A108 
8890& dswid=- 7446.

Finlay S (2014) Predictive analytics, data mining, and big data: Myths. Palgrave Macmillan, Misconcep-

tions and Methods, p 2014

Fuller L (1964) The Morality of Law, Revised Edition. Yale University Press, New Haven and London
Lessig L (2006) Code Version 2.0. Basic Books, New York

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…320 

S. Greenstein 

Lind A, Reichel J, Österdahl I (2017) Transparency in the future: swedish openness 250 years. Ragulka 

Press, Visby

Magnusson Sjöberg C (2016) Rättsinformatik: Juridiken i det digitala informationssamhället. Studentlit-

teratur, Lund

MacCormick N (2005) Rhetoric and the rule of law: a theory of legal reasoning. Oxford University Press, 

Oxford

Modin A, Andrén J (eds) (2019) The essential AI handbook for leaders. Peltarion
Nääv M, Zamboni M (2018) Juridisk Metodlära. Studentlitteratur, Lund
Russell S, Norvig P (2010) Artificial intelligence: a modern approach, 3rd edn. Pearson, London
Sannerholm R (2020) Rättsstaten Sverige: skandaler, kriser, politik, Timbro
Simmonds  NE  (1986)  Central  Issues  in  Jurisprudence:  Justice,  Law  and  Rights.  Sweet  and  Maxwell, 

London

Tamanaha B (2004) On the Rule of Law. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Vouk V, Gammerman A, Shafer G (2005) Algorithmic Learning in a Random World. Springer, New York
Wahlgren P (ed) (2018) 50 Years of Law and IT, vol 65. Scandinavian Studies in Law, Stockholm
Wahlgren P (2014) Lagstiftning: rationalitet, teknik, möjligheter. Jure AB, Stockholm

Book Chapter

Amir E (2014) Reasoning and Decision Making. In: Frankish K, Ramsey W (eds) The Cambridge Hand-

book of Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge

Arkoudas K, Bringsjord S (2014) (2014) Philosophical Foundations. In: Frankish K, Ramsey WM (eds) 
The Cambridge Handbook of Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Bedau M (2014) Artificial Life. In: Frankish K, Ramsey W (eds) The Cambridge Handbook of Artificial 

Intelligence. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge

Calders T, Zliobaite I (2013) Why Unbiased Computational Processes Can Lead to Discriminative Deci-
sion Procedures. In: Custers B et al (eds) Discrimination and Privacy in the Information Society – 
Data Mining and Profiling in Large Databases. Springer

Custer B (2013) Data Dilemas in the Information Society: Introduction and Overview. In: Custers B et al 
(eds) Discrimination and Privacy in the Information Society – Data Mining and Profiling in Large 
Databases. Springer, p 2013

Ellul J (2003) The ‘autonomy’ of the technological phenomenon. In: Scharff RC, Dusek V (eds) Philoso-

phy of Technology: The Technological Condition. Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Malden, pp 386–395

Floridi L, Cowls J, Beltrametti M et al (2018) AI4People: An Ethical Framework for a Good AI Soci-
ety—opportunities,  risks,  principles,  and  recommendations.  Mind  Mach  28:689–707.  https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1007/ s11023- 018- 9482-5

Lundblad N (2018) Law, Technology and Time. In: Wahlgren P (ed) 50 Years of Law and IT. Scandina-

vian Studies in Law, Jure, pp 401–414

Matsou,  (2009)  Let  the  Rule  of  Law  be  Flexible  to  Attain  Good  Governance.  In:  Berling  P,  Ederlöf  J, 
Taylor V (eds) Rule of Law Promotion: Global Perspectives, Local Applications, Skrifter från jurid-
iska institutionen vid Umeå universitet Nr 21. Iustus Förlag, Uppsala, pp 41–56

Palmiotto F (2020) The black box on trial: the impact of algorithmic opacity on fair trial rights in crimi-
nal proceedings. In: Cantero Ebers M, Gamito M (eds) Algorithmic Governance and Governance of 
Algorithms: Legal and Ethical Challenges. Springer International Publishing, Switzerland

Suksi M (2017) On the openness of the digital society: from religion via language to algorithm as the 
basis for the exercise of public powers. In: Lind A, Reichel J, Österdahl I (eds) Transparency in the 
Future: Swedish Openness 250 Years. Ragulka Press, Visby

Van der Sloot B (2013) From data minimization to data minimummization. In: Custers B, Calders T, Sch-
ermer B, Zarsky T (eds) Discrimination and Privacy in the Information Society: Data Mining and 
Profiling in Large Databases. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, p 285

Wahlgren P (2018) Automatiserade Juridiska Beslut. In: Nääv M, Zamboni M (eds) Juridisk Metodlära. 

Studentlitteratur, Lund, p 414

Wennerström E (2009) Measuring the rule of law. In: Berling P, Ederlöf J, Taylor V (eds) Rule of Law 
Promotion: Global Perspectives, Local Applications, Skrifter från juridiska institutionen vid Umeå 
universitet Nr 21. Iustus Förlag, Uppsala, pp 57–75

1 3321

Ziegert K (2009) Is the rule of law portable?: A socio-legal journey from the Nordic Mediterranean Sea 
via the silk road to China. In: Berling P, Ederlöf J, Taylor V (eds) Rule of Law Promotion: Global 
Perspectives, Local Applications, Skrifter från juridiska institutionen vid Umeå universitet Nr 21. 
Iustus Förlag, Uppsala, pp 19–40

Journals

Bayamlioglu E, Leenes R (2018) Data-driven decision-making and the ‘Rule of Law.’ TILT Law Technol 

Working Paper, Tilburg University. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 17579 961. 2016. 11618 91

Brownsword R (2016) Technological Management and the Rule of Law. Law Innovation Technol, Rout-

ledge 8(1):100–140

Harvard Law Review, Criminal Law (2017), State v. Loomis, 130 Harv. L. Rev. 1530, available at https:// 

harva rdlaw review. org/ 2017/ 03/ state-v- loomis/. (Accessed 30 Dec 2019).

Murphy  C  (2005)  Lon  Fuller  and  the  Moral  Value  of  the  Rule  of  Law.  Law  Philosophy,  Springer 

24(3):239–262

Tolan, S, Miron, M, Gomez, E, Castillo, C (2019) Why Machine Learning May Lead to Unfairness: Evi-
dence from Risk Assessment for Juvenolöe Justice in Catalonia. In Seventeenth International Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence and Law (ICAIL ’19), June 17–21, 2019, Montreal.

Vedder A (1999) KDD: The challenge to individualism. Ethics Information Technol, Kluwer Academic 

Publishers 1:275–281

Wachter S, Mittelstadt, B, Floridi L (2016) Why a Right to Explanation of Automated Decision-Making 
Does Not Exist in the General Data Protection Regulation, International Data Privacy Law, 2017. 
Accessed 30 Dec 2019 at SSRN: https:// ssrn. com/ abstr act= 29034 69 or https:// doi. org/ 10. 2139/ ssrn. 
29034 69 .

Winter S, Johansson P (2009) Digitalis filosofi: Människor, modeller och maskiner, SE’s Internet guide, 

nr. 13, version 1.0.

Kroll J, Huey J, Barocas S, Felten E, Reidenberg J, Robinson D, Yu H (2017), Accountable Algorithms, 
165(3), University of Pensylvania Law Review, http:// schol arship. law. upenn. edu/ penn_ law_ review/ 
vol165/ iss3/3. Accessed on 30 Dec 2019.

Krygier M (2019) What’s the point of the rule of law? Buffalo Law Rev 67(3):743–791
Sarra,  C  (2020)  Put  Dialectics  into  the  Machine:  Protecting  Against  Automatic-Ddecision-making 
through  a  Deeper  Understanding  of  Contestability  by  Design,  Vol.  20,  Issue  3,  Global  Jurist,  De 
Gryter available at Put Dialectics into the Machine: Protection against Automatic-decision-making 
through  a  Deeper  Understanding  of  Contestability  by  Design  (degruyter.com)  (last  accessed  on 
2021-06-15).

Other matter

Angwin J, Larson J, Mattu S, Kirchner L, Machine Bias, ProPublica, https:// www. propu blica. org/ artic le/ 

machi ne- bias- risk- asses sments- in- crimi nal- sente ncing. Accessed 30 Dec 2019.

Asser Institute 2020, [Interview]: Curtailing the surveillance state? Anticipating the SyRI case judgment, 
2020, Interview with Wisman, T., available at [Interview]: Curtailing the surveillance state? Antici-
pating the SyRI case judgment (asser.nl) (last accessed on 2021-06-12).

Battaglini M (2020) Historical sentence of the Court of The Hague striking down the collection of data 
and profiling for Social Security fraud (SyRI), Transparent Internet available at Syri Sentence, an 
historical  Sentence  against  discriminatory  profiling  (transparentinternet.com)  (last  accessed  on 
2021-06-14).

Chin J (2016) China’s new tool for social control: a credit rating for everything, The Wall Street Jour-
nal,  https:// www. wsj. com/ artic les/ chinas- new- tool- for- social- contr ol-a- credit- rating- for- every thing- 
14803 51590. Accessed on 30 December 2019.

Choi,  N,  Rule  of  law,  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  2019,  https:// www. brita nnica. com/ topic/ rule- of- law. 

Accessed on 11 June 2021.

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…322 

S. Greenstein 

Electronic Privacy Information Centre, Algorithms in the Criminal Justice System: Pre-Trial Assessment 

Tools, https:// epic. org/ algor ithmic- trans paren cy/ crim- justi ce/. Accessed on 30 Dec 2019.

Elements of AI, Chapter 1, available at https:// www. eleme ntsof ai. com/.
English Oxford Living Dictionaries, Algorithm, available at https:// en. oxfor ddict ionar ies. com/ defin ition/ 

algor ithm. Accessed on 30 December 2019.

Expert.ai, What is Machine Learning? A Definition, available at What is Machine Learning? A defini-

tion-Expert System|Expert.ai (last accessed on 2021-06-12).

Gibbs  S  (2016),  Chatbot  Lawyer  Overturns  160  000  Parking  Tickets  in  London  and  New  York,  The 
Guardian,  available  at  https:// www. thegu ardian. com/ techn ology/ 2016/ jun/ 28/ chatb ot- ai- lawyer- 
donot pay- parki ng- ticke ts- london- new- york  (last  accessed  on  2021-06-15).  See  also  DoNotPay, 
available at http:// www. donot pay. co. uk/ signup. php (last accessed on 2021-06-15).

Liptak  A  (2017)  Sent  to  Prison  by  a  Software  Programe’s  Secret  Algorithm,  The  New  York  Times, 
https:// www. nytim es. com/ 2017/ 05/ 01/ us/ polit ics/ sent- to- prison- by-a- softw  are- progr ams- secret- 
algor ithms. html. Accessed on 30 December 2019.

Organization  for  Security  and  Co-Operation  in  Europe  (OSCE),  Rule  of  law,  Rule  of  law  |  OSCE 

(Accessed 11 June 2021).

Prabhakar  K  (2019),  Understanding  Data  Bias,  Towards  Data  Science,  https:// towar dsdat ascie nce. com/ 

survey- d4f16 8791e 57. Accessed on 30 Dec 2019.

Stanford  Encyclopedia  of  Philosophy,  The  Rule  of  Law,  available  at  https:// plato. stanf ord. edu/ entri es/ 

rule- of- law/. Accessed on 30 December 2019.

Stanley J (2015) ACLU, China’s Nightmarish Citizen Scores Are a Warning for Americans, https:// www. 
aclu. org/ blog/ priva cy- techn ology/ consu mer- priva cy/ chinas- night marish- citiz en- scores- are- warni  
ng- ameri cans? redir ect= blog/ free- future/ chinas- night marish- citiz en- scores- are- warni ng- ameri cans. 
Accessed on 30 December 2019.

World Justice Project (2019), Rule of Law Index, 2019.
World Justice Project (2019), World Justice Project Rule of Law Index 2019 Insights.
European  Commission  for  Democracy  Through  Law  (Venice  Commission),  Rule  of  Law  Checklist, 
CDL-AD(2016)007-e  available  at  https:// www. venice. coe. int/ webfo rms/ docum ents/? pdf= CDL- 
AD(2016) 007-e. Accessed on 30 December 2019.

Kowalkiewicz  M,  How  Did  We  Get  There?  The  Story  of  Algorithms,  Towards  Data  Science,  https:// 
towar dsdat ascie nce. com/ how- did- we- get- here- the- story- of- algor ithms- 9ee18 6ba2a 07.  Accessed  on 
30 Dec 2019.

Van Eck, M (2020), Risk profiling Act SyRI off the table, Leiden University, available at Risk profiling 
Act SyRI off the table - Leiden University (universiteitleiden.nl) (last accessed on 2021-06-12).

Case Law and Official Matter

State v. Loomis, 881, N.W.2d 749, 7532 (Wis, 2016).
NJCM et al. v. The State of the Netherlands Hague District Court, C/09/550982 / HA ZA 18-388, Judge-

ment 5 February, 2020, (SyRI case).

European Commission for Democracy Through Law (Venice Commission), Rule of Law Checklist, CDL-
(2016)007-e  https:// www. venice. coe. int/ webfo rms/ docum ents/? pdf= CDL- AD(2016) 007-e. 

AD 
Accessed on 30 December 2019.

UK House of Lords Artificial Intelligence Committee’s Report, AI in the UK: ready, willing and able? 

(2018).

Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the pro-
tection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement 
of  such  data,  and  repealing  Directive  95/46/EC  (General  Data  Protection  Regulation),  OJ  L  119, 
4.5.2016.

European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council Lay-
ing Down Harmonized Rules on Artificial Intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) and Amending 
Certain European Union Acts, Brussels, 21.4.2021 COM(2021) 206 final, available at Proposal for a 
Regulation laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence | Shaping Europe’s digital future 
(europa.eu) (last accessed 2021-04-29).

The Law Society of England and Wales, The Law Society Commission on the Use of Algorithms in the 
Criminal Justice System, Algorithms in the Criminal Justice System, https:// www. lawso ciety. org. uk/ 

1 3323

suppo rt- servi ces/ resea rch- trends/ algor ithm- use- in- the- crimi nal- justi ce- system- report/.  Accessed  on 
30 Dec 2019.

Report of the Secretary General of the United Nations, The Rule of Law and Transitional Justice in Con-

flict and Post Conflict Countries, United Nations Security Council, 2004.

Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.

1 3Preserving the rule of law in the era of artificial intelligence…
